# Source: https://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556
# Author: Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman
# Title: Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Large-Scale Image Recognition (VGG)
# Fetched via: search
# Date: 2026-04-09

# Computer Science > Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
**arXiv:1409.1556** (cs)
[Submitted on 4 Sep 2014 (v1), last revised 10 Apr 2015 (this version, v6)]
…
Abstract:In this work we investigate the effect of the convolutional network depth on its accuracy in the large-scale image recognition setting.
Our main contribution is a thorough evaluation of networks of increasing depth using an architecture with very small (3x3) convolution filters, which shows that a significant improvement on the prior-art configurations can be achieved by pushing the depth to 16-19 weight layers.
These findings were the basis of our ImageNet Challenge 2014 submission, where our team secured the first and the second places in the localisation and classification tracks respectively.
We also show that our representations generalise well to other datasets, where they achieve state-of-the-art results.
We have made our two best-performing ConvNet models publicly available to facilitate further research on the use of deep visual representations in computer vision.

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2015
VERY DEEP CONVOLUTIONAL NETWORKS
FOR LARGE-SCALE IMAGE RECOGNITION
Karen Simonyan∗& Andrew Zisserman+
Visual Geometry Group, Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
{karen,az}@robots.ox.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
In this work we investigate the effect of the convolutional network depth on its
accuracy in the large-scale image recognition setting. Our main contribution is
a thorough evaluation of networks of increasing depth using an architecture with
very small (3 × 3) convolution filters, which shows that a significant improvement
on the prior-art configurations can be achieved by pushing the depth to 16–19
weight layers. These findings were the basis of our ImageNet Challenge 2014
submission, where our team secured the first and the second places in the localisa-
tion and classification tracks respectively. We also show that our representations
generalise well to other datasets, where they achieve state-of-the-art results. We
have made our two best-performing ConvNet models publicly available to facili-
tate further research on the use of deep visual representations in computer vision.
1
INTRODUCTION
Convolutional networks (ConvNets) have recently enjoyed a great success in large-scale im-
age and video recognition (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Zeiler & Fergus, 2013; Sermanet et al., 2014;
Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014) which has become possible due to the large public image reposito-
ries, such as ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009), and high-performance computing systems, such as GPUs
or large-scale distributed clusters (Dean et al., 2012). In particular, an important role in the advance
of deep visual recognition architectures has been played by the ImageNet Large-Scale Visual Recog-
nition Challenge (ILSVRC) (Russakovsky et al., 2014), which has served as a testbed for a few
generations of large-scale image classification systems, from high-dimensional shallow feature en-

…

tempts have been made to improve the original architecture of Krizhevsky et al. (2012) in a
bid to achieve better accuracy. For instance, the best-performing submissions to the ILSVRC-
2013 (Zeiler & Fergus, 2013; Sermanet et al., 2014) utilised smaller receptive window size and
smaller stride of the first convolutional layer. Another line of improvements dealt with training
and testing the networks densely over the whole image and over multiple scales (Sermanet et al.,
2014; Howard, 2014). In this paper, we address another important aspect of ConvNet architecture
design – its depth. To this end, we fix other parameters of the architecture, and steadily increase the
depth of the network by adding more convolutional layers, which is feasible due to the use of very
small (3 × 3) convolution filters in all layers.
As a result, we come up with significantly more accurate ConvNet architectures, which not only
achieve the state-of-the-art accuracy on ILSVRC classification and localisation tasks, but are also
applicable to other image recognition datasets, where they achieve excellent performance even when
used as a part of a relatively simple pipelines (e.g. deep features classified by a linear SVM without
fine-tuning). We have released our two best-performing models1 to facilitate further research.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. In Sect. 2, we describe our ConvNet configurations.

…

processing we do is subtracting the mean RGB value, computed on the training set, from each pixel.
The image is passed through a stack of convolutional (conv.) layers, where we use filters with a very
small receptive field: 3 × 3 (which is the smallest size to capture the notion of left/right, up/down,
center). In one of the configurations we also utilise 1 × 1 convolution filters, which can be seen as
a linear transformation of the input channels (followed by non-linearity). The convolution stride is
fixed to 1 pixel; the spatial padding of conv. layer input is such that the spatial resolution is preserved
after convolution, i.e. the padding is 1 pixel for 3 × 3 conv. layers. Spatial pooling is carried out by
five max-pooling layers, which follow some of the conv. layers (not all the conv. layers are followed
by max-pooling). Max-pooling is performed over a 2 × 2 pixel window, with stride 2.
A stack of convolutional layers (which has a different depth in different architectures) is followed by
three Fully-Connected (FC) layers: the first two have 4096 channels each, the third performs 1000-
way ILSVRC classification and thus contains 1000 channels (one for each class). The final layer is
the soft-max layer. The configuration of the fully connected layers is the same in all networks.
All hidden layers are equipped with the rectification (ReLU (Krizhevsky et al., 2012)) non-linearity.
We note that none of our networks (except for one) contain Local Response Normalisation
(LRN) normalisation (Krizhevsky et al., 2012): as will be shown in Sect. 4, such normalisation
does not improve the performance on the ILSVRC dataset, but leads to increased memory con-
sumption and computation time. Where applicable, the parameters for the LRN layer are those

…

design presented in Sect. 2.1, and differ only in the depth: from 11 weight layers in the network A
(8 conv. and 3 FC layers) to 19 weight layers in the network E (16 conv. and 3 FC layers). The width
of conv. layers (the number of channels) is rather small, starting from 64 in the first layer and then

…

larger conv. layer widths and receptive fields (144M weights in (Sermanet et al., 2014)).
2.3
DISCUSSION
Our ConvNet configurations are quite different from the ones used in the top-performing entries
of the ILSVRC-2012 (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and ILSVRC-2013 competitions (Zeiler & Fergus,

…

2013; Sermanet et al., 2014)), we use very small 3 × 3 receptive fields throughout the whole net,
which are convolved with the input at every pixel (with stride 1). It is easy to see that a stack of two
3 × 3 conv. layers (without spatial pooling in between) has an effective receptive field of 5 × 5; three
2

…

= 27C2
weights; at the same time, a single 7 × 7 conv. layer would require 72C2 = 49C2 parameters, i.e.
81% more. This can be seen as imposing a regularisation on the 7 × 7 conv. filters, forcing them to

…

Goodfellow et al. (2014) applied deep ConvNets (11 weight layers) to the task of
street number recognition, and showed that the increased depth led to better performance.
GoogLeNet (Szegedy et al., 2014), a top-performing entry of the ILSVRC-2014 classification task,
was developed independently of our work, but is similar in that it is based on very deep ConvNets
3

…

out by optimising the multinomial logistic regression objective using mini-batch gradient descent
(based on back-propagation (LeCun et al., 1989)) with momentum. The batch size was set to 256,
momentum to 0.9. The training was regularised by weight decay (the L2 penalty multiplier set to
5·10−4) and dropout regularisation for the first two fully-connected layers (dropout ratio set to 0.5).
The learning rate was initially set to 10−2, and then decreased by a factor of 10 when the validation
set accuracy stopped improving. In total, the learning rate was decreased 3 times, and the learning

…

with the zero mean and 10−2 variance. The biases were initialised with zero. It is worth noting that
after the paper submission we found that it is possible to initialise the weights without pre-training
by using the random initialisation procedure of Glorot & Bengio (2010).
To obtain the fixed-size 224×224 ConvNet input images, they were randomly cropped from rescaled

…

scale image statistics). In our experiments, we evaluated models trained at two fixed scales: S =
256 (which has been widely used in the prior art (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Zeiler & Fergus, 2013;
Sermanet et al., 2014)) and S = 384. Given a ConvNet configuration, we first trained the network
using S = 256. To speed-up training of the S = 384 network, it was initialised with the weights
pre-trained with S = 256, and we used a smaller initial learning rate of 10−3.
The second approach to setting S is multi-scale training, where each training image is individually

…

in Sect. 4, using several values of Q for each S leads to improved performance). Then, the network
is applied densely over the rescaled test image in a way similar to (Sermanet et al., 2014). Namely,
the fully-connected layers are first converted to convolutional layers (the first FC layer to a 7 × 7
conv. layer, the last two FC layers to 1 × 1 conv. layers). The resulting fully-convolutional net is
then applied to the whole (uncropped) image. The result is a class score map with the number of
channels equal to the number of classes, and a variable spatial resolution, dependent on the input
image size. Finally, to obtain a fixed-size vector of class scores for the image, the class score map is
spatially averaged (sum-pooled). We also augment the test set by horizontal flipping of the images;
the soft-max class posteriors of the original and flipped images are averaged to obtain the final scores

…

(2014), can lead to improved accuracy, as it results in a finer sampling of the input image compared
to the fully-convolutional net. Also, multi-crop evaluation is complementary to dense evaluation due
to different convolution boundary conditions: when applying a ConvNet to a crop, the convolved
feature maps are padded with zeros, while in the case of dense evaluation the padding for the same
crop naturally comes from the neighbouring parts of an image (due to both the convolutions and
spatial pooling), which substantially increases the overall network receptive field, so more context
is captured. While we believe that in practice the increased computation time of multiple crops does
not justify the potential gains in accuracy, for reference we also evaluate our networks using 50 crops

…

lenges). The dataset includes images of 1000 classes, and is split into three sets: training (1.3M
images), validation (50K images), and testing (100K images with held-out class labels). The clas-
sification performance is evaluated using two measures: the top-1 and top-5 error. The former is a
multi-class classification error, i.e. the proportion of incorrectly classified images; the latter is the
5

…

First, we note that using local response normalisation (A-LRN network) does not improve on the
model A without any normalisation layers. We thus do not employ normalisation in the deeper
architectures (B–E).
Second, we observe that the classification error decreases with the increased ConvNet depth: from
11 layers in A to 19 layers in E. Notably, in spite of the same depth, the configuration C (which
contains three 1 × 1 conv. layers), performs worse than the configuration D, which uses 3 × 3 conv.
layers throughout the network. This indicates that while the additional non-linearity does help (C is
better than B), it is also important to capture spatial context by using conv. filters with non-trivial
receptive fields (D is better than C). The error rate of our architecture saturates when the depth
reaches 19 layers, but even deeper models might be beneficial for larger datasets. We also compared
the net B with a shallow net with five 5 × 5 conv. layers, which was derived from B by replacing
each pair of 3 × 3 conv. layers with a single 5 × 5 conv. layer (which has the same receptive field as
explained in Sect. 2.3). The top-1 error of the shallow net was measured to be 7% higher than that

…

single-scale networks, as well as a multi-scale model D (by fine-tuning only the fully-connected
layers rather than all layers). The resulting ensemble of 7 networks has 7.3% ILSVRC test error.
After the submission, we considered an ensemble of only two best-performing multi-scale models

…

23.7
6.8
6.8
7.3% test error using an ensemble of 7 models. After the submission, we decreased the error rate to
6.8% using an ensemble of 2 models.
As can be seen from Table 7, our very deep ConvNets significantly outperform the previous gener-

…

Method
top-1 val. error (%) top-5 val. error (%) top-5 test error (%)
VGG (2 nets, multi-crop & dense eval.)
23.7
6.8
6.8
VGG (1 net, multi-crop & dense eval.)
24.4

…

-
5
CONCLUSION
In this work we evaluated very deep convolutional networks (up to 19 weight layers) for large-
scale image classification. It was demonstrated that the representation depth is beneficial for the
classification accuracy, and that state-of-the-art performance on the ImageNet challenge dataset can
be achieved using a conventional ConvNet architecture (LeCun et al., 1989; Krizhevsky et al., 2012)
with substantially increased depth. In the appendix, we also show that our models generalise well to
a wide range of tasks and datasets, matching or outperforming more complex recognition pipelines
built around less deep image representations. Our results yet again confirm the importance of depth
in visual representations.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by ERC grant VisRec no. 228180. We gratefully acknowledge the support
of NVIDIA Corporation with the donation of the GPUs used for this research.
8

This repo is an attempt to implement the paper
**Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Large-Scale Image Recognition**
K. Simonyan, A. Zisserman
ICLR 2015 (**oral**)
[arXiv (updated 10 Apr 2015)] [ILSVRC 2014 presentation] [Project page & ILSVRC ConvNet models]
…
Dataset info:
- Link: ILSVRC2010
- Training size: *1261406 images*
- Validation size: *50000 images*
- Test size: *150000 images*
- Dataset size: *124 GB*
To save up time:
I got one corrupted image (`n02487347_1956.JPEG`).
...
Before using this code, please make sure you can open `n02487347_1956.JPEG` using `PIL`.
If not delete the image, you won't loose anything if you delete 1 image out of 1 million.
…
1. **Rescaling**: Isotropically rescale the image such that the smallest size is randomly drawn from `[256, 512]`.
In short *isotropically* means the ratio of width to height of the original image should match with that of the new image.
2. **Cropping**: Randomly crop the image from the rescaled image to get a size of `(224, 224)`.
3. - ****Augmentation**: Augment the data in two ways**
1.
Horizontally flip the image with 50 % probability 2.
Add PCA as calculated by AlexNet to the processed image to give color shifting.
4. **Subtract mean**: Finally subtract the mean activity from the processed image.
**Note**: To calculate eigenvalues and eigenvectors for the imagenet dataset will require significant amount of RAM.
So the values are taken from stackoverflow and hardcoded while adding PCA.
### Tensorflow Generated Graphs
**top1 accuracy**:
**top5 accuracy**:
**loss**:

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2015
VERY DEEP CONVOLUTIONAL NETWORKS
FOR LARGE-SCALE IMAGE RECOGNITION
Karen Simonyan∗& Andrew Zisserman+
Visual Geometry Group, Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
{karen,az}@robots.ox.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
In this work we investigate the effect of the convolutional network depth on its
accuracy in the large-scale image recognition setting.
Our main contribution is
a thorough evaluation of networks of increasing depth using an architecture with
very small (3 × 3) convolution filters, which shows that a significant improvement
on the prior-art configurations can be achieved by pushing the depth to 16–19
weight layers.
These findings were the basis of our ImageNet Challenge 2014
submission, where our team secured the first and the second places in the localisa-
tion and classification tracks respectively.
We also show that our representations
generalise well to other datasets, where they achieve state-of-the-art results.
We
have made our two best-performing ConvNet models publicly available to facili-
tate further research on the use of deep visual representations in computer vision.
1
INTRODUCTION
Convolutional networks (ConvNets) have recently enjoyed a great success in large-scale im-
age and video recognition (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Zeiler & Fergus, 2013; Sermanet et al., 2014;
…
smaller stride of the first convolutional layer.
Another line of improvements dealt with training
and testing the networks densely over the whole image and over multiple scales (Sermanet et al.,
2014; Howard, 2014).
In this paper, we address another important aspect of ConvNet architecture
design – its depth.
To this end, we fix other parameters of the architecture, and steadily increase the
depth of the network by adding more convolutional layers, which is feasible due to the use of very
small (3 × 3) convolution filters in all layers.
As a result, we come up with significantly more accurate ConvNet architectures, which not only
achieve the state-of-the-art accuracy on ILSVRC classification and localisation tasks, but are also
applicable to other image recognition datasets, where they achieve excellent performance even when
used as a part of a relatively simple pipelines (e.g. deep features classified by a linear SVM without
fine-tuning).
We have released our two best-performing models1 to facilitate further research.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows.
In Sect.
2, we describe our ConvNet configurations.
…
processing we do is subtracting the mean RGB value, computed on the training set, from each pixel.
The image is passed through a stack of convolutional (conv.) layers, where we use filters with a very
small receptive field: 3 × 3 (which is the smallest size to capture the notion of left/right, up/down,
center).
In one of the configurations we also utilise 1 × 1 convolution filters, which can be seen as
a linear transformation of the input channels (followed by non-linearity).
The convolution stride is
fixed to 1 pixel; the spatial padding of conv.
layer input is such that the spatial resolution is preserved
…
A stack of convolutional layers (which has a different depth in different architectures) is followed by
three Fully-Connected (FC) layers: the first two have 4096 channels each, the third performs 1000-
way ILSVRC classification and thus contains 1000 channels (one for each class).
The final layer is
…
= 27C2
weights; at the same time, a single 7 × 7 conv.
layer would require 72C2 = 49C2 parameters, i.e.
81% more.
This can be seen as imposing a regularisation on the 7 × 7 conv.
filters, forcing them to
…
was stopped after 370K iterations (74 epochs).
We conjecture that in spite of the larger number of
parameters and the greater depth of our nets compared to (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), the nets required
less epochs to converge due to (a) implicit regularisation imposed by greater depth and smaller conv.
…
in Sect.
4, using several values of Q for each S leads to improved performance).
Then, the network
is applied densely over the rescaled test image in a way similar to (Sermanet et al., 2014).
Namely,
the fully-connected layers are first converted to convolutional layers (the first FC layer to a 7 × 7
conv.
layer, the last two FC layers to 1 × 1 conv.
layers).
The resulting fully-convolutional net is
then applied to the whole (uncropped) image.
The result is a class score map with the number of
channels equal to the number of classes, and a variable spatial resolution, dependent on the input
…
for the image.
Since the fully-convolutional network is applied over the whole image, there is no need to sample
multiple crops at test time (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), which is less efficient as it requires network
re-computation for each crop.
At the same time, using a large set of crops, as done by Szegedy et al.
(2014), can lead to improved accuracy, as it results in a finer sampling of the input image compared
to the fully-convolutional net.
Also, multi-crop evaluation is complementary to dense evaluation due
to different convolution boundary conditions: when applying a ConvNet to a crop, the convolved
feature maps are padded with zeros, while in the case of dense evaluation the padding for the same
crop naturally comes from the neighbouring parts of an image (due to both the convolutions and
spatial pooling), which substantially increases the overall network receptive field, so more context
is captured.
While we believe that in practice the increased computation time of multiple crops does
not justify the potential gains in accuracy, for reference we also evaluate our networks using 50 crops
…
First, we note that using local response normalisation (A-LRN network) does not improve on the
model A without any normalisation layers.
We thus do not employ normalisation in the deeper
architectures (B–E).
Second, we observe that the classification error decreases with the increased ConvNet depth: from
11 layers in A to 19 layers in E.
Notably, in spite of the same depth, the configuration C (which
contains three 1 × 1 conv.
layers), performs worse than the configuration D, which uses 3 × 3 conv.
layers throughout the network.
This indicates that while the additional non-linearity does help (C is
…
the net B with a shallow net with five 5 × 5 conv.
layers, which was derived from B by replacing
each pair of 3 × 3 conv.
layers with a single 5 × 5 conv.
layer (which has the same receptive field as
explained in Sect.
2.3).
The top-1 error of the shallow net was measured to be 7% higher than that
…
23.7
6.8
6.8
7.3% test error using an ensemble of 7 models.
After the submission, we decreased the error rate to
6.8% using an ensemble of 2 models.
As can be seen from Table 7, our very deep ConvNets significantly outperform the previous gener-

Abstract In this work we investigate the effect of the convolutional network depth on its accuracy in the large-scale image recognition setting. Our main contribution is a thorough evaluation of networks of increasing depth, which shows that a signifi- cant improvement on the prior-art configurations can be achieved by pushing the depth to 16–19 weight layers. These findings were the basis of our ImageNet Challenge 2014 submission, where our team secured the first and the second places in the localisation and classification tracks respectively.
1 Introduction Convolutional networks (ConvNets) have recently enjoyed a great success in large-scale visual recognition [10, 16, 17, 19] which has become possible due to the large public image repositories, such as ImageNet [4], and high-performance computing systems, such as GPUs or large-scale dis- tributed clusters [3].
In particular, an important role in the advance of deep visual recognition archi- tectures has been played by the ImageNet Large-Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC) [1], which has served as a testbed for a few generations of large-scale image classification systems, from high-dimensional shallow feature encodings [13] (the winner of ILSVRC-2011) to deep Con- vNets [10] (the winner of ILSVRC-2012).
With ConvNets becoming more of a commodity in the computer vision field, a number of attempts have been made to improve the original architecture of [10] in a bid to achieve better accuracy. For instance, the best-performing submissions to the ILSVRC-2013 [16, 19] utilised smaller receptive window size and smaller stride of the first convolutional layer.
Another line of improvements dealt with training and testing the networks densely over the whole image and over multiple scales [7, 16]. In this paper, we address another important aspect of ConvNet architecture design – its depth. To this end, we fix other parameters of the architecture, and steadily increase the depth of the network by adding more convolutional layers.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. In Sect. 2, we describe our ConvNet configurations. The details of the image classification training and evaluation are then presented in Sect. 3, and the configurations are compared on the ILSVRC classification task in Sect. 4. For completeness, we also describe and assess our object localisation system in Sect. 5, and Sect. 6 concludes.

…

2.2). Our design choices are then discussed and compared to the prior art in Sect. 2.3. 2.1 Architecture The input to a ConvNet is a fixed-size 224 × 224 RGB image. The only pre-processing we do is subtracting the mean RGB value, computed on the training set, from each pixel. The image
1is passed through a stack of convolutional (conv.) layers, where we use filters with a very smallreceptive field: 3 × 3 (which is the smallest size to capture the notion of left/right, up/down, center).We also experimented with 1 × 1 convolution filters, which can be seen as a linear transformation ofthe input channels (followed by non-linearity).
The convolution stride is fixed to 1 pixel; the spatialpadding of conv. layer input is such that the spatial resolution is preserved after convolution, i.e. thepadding is 1 pixel for 3 × 3 conv. layers.Spatial pooling is carried out by 5 max-pooling layers, which follow some of the conv. layers (notall the conv. layers are followed by max-pooling).
Max-pooling is carried out over a 2 × 2 pixelwindow, with stride 2.A stack of convolutional layers (which has a different number of layers in different architectures)is followed by three Fully-Connected (FC) layers: the first two have 4096 channels each, the thirdperforms 1000-way classification and thus contains 1000 channels (one for each class).
The finallayer is the soft-max transform layer. The configuration of the fully connected layers is the same inall networks.All weight layers (except for the last fully-connected classification layer) are equipped with the rec-tification (ReLU [10]) non-linearity. We note that our networks (apart from one) do not containLocal Response Normalisation (LRN) normalisation [10]: as will be shown in Sect. 4, such normal-isation does not improve the performance on the ILSVRC dataset, but leads to increased memoryconsumption and computation time.

…

2.1, and differ only in the depth: from 11 weight layers in the network A(8 conv. and 3 FC layers) to 19 weight layers in the network E (16 conv. and 3 FC layers). The widthof conv. layers (the number of channels) is rather small, starting from 64 in the first layer and thenincreasing by a factor of 2 after each max-pooling layer, until it reaches 512.
In Table 2 we report the number of parameters for each configuration. In spite of a large depth, thenumber of weights in our nets is not greater than the number of weights in a more shallow net withlarger conv. layer widths and receptive fields (144M weights in [16]).2.3 DiscussionOur ConvNet configurations are quite different from the ones used in the top-performing entriesto ILSVRC-2012 and ILSVRC-2013 competitions [10, 16, 19].
Rather than using relatively largereceptive fields in the first conv. layers (e.g. 11 × 11 with stride 4 in [10], or 7 × 7 with stride 2in [16, 19]), we use very small 3 × 3 receptive fields throughout the whole net, which are convolvedwith the input at every pixel (with stride 1).
It is easy to see that a stack of two 3 × 3 conv. layers(without spatial pooling in between) has an effective receptive field of 5 × 5; three such layers havea 7 × 7 effective receptive field. So what have we gained by using, for instance, a stack of three3 × 3 conv. layers instead of a single 7 × 7 layer?
First, we incorporate three non-linear rectificationlayers instead of a single one, which makes the decision function more discriminative.
Second, wedecrease the number of parameters: assuming that both the input and the output of a three-layer3 × 3 convolution stack has C channels, the stack is parametrised by 3 32 C 2 = 27C 2 weights; atthe same time, a single 7 × 7
conv. layer would require 72 C 2 = 49C 2 parameters, i.e. 81% more.This can be seen as imposing a regularisation on the 7 × 7 conv. filters, forcing them to have adecomposition through the 3 × 3 filters (with non-linearity injected in between).
The incorporation of 1 × 1 conv. layers (configuration C, Table 1) is a way to increase the non-linearity of the decision function without affecting the receptive fields of the conv. layers. Eventhough in our case the 1 × 1 convolution is essentially a linear projection onto the space of the samedimensionality (the number of input and output channels is the same), additional non-linearity isintroduced by the rectification function.

…

In this section, wedescribe the details of classification ConvNet training and evaluation.3.1 TrainingThe ConvNet training procedure generally follows [10] (except for using the whole training imagesat multiple scales, as explained later). Namely, the training is carried out using mini-batch gradientdescent (based on back-propagation [11]) with momentum.
The batch size was set to 256, momen-tum – to 0.9. The training was regularised by weight decay (the L2 penalty multiplier set to 5 · 10−4 )and dropout regularisation for the first two fully-connected layers (dropout ratio set to 0.5).
Thelearning rate was initially set to 10−2 , and then decreased by a factor of 10 when the validationset accuracy stopped improving. In total, the learning rate was decreased 3 times, and the learningwas stopped after 370K iterations (74 epochs). We conjecture that in spite of the larger numberof parameters and the greater depth of our nets compared to [10], the nets required less epochs to
3converge due to (a) implicit regularisation imposed by greater depth and smaller conv. filter sizes;(b) pre-initialisation of certain layers.The initialisation of the network weights is important, since bad initialisation will stall learning dueto a large number of rectification (cut-off) non-linearities.
To circumvent this problem, we beganwith training the configuration A (Table 1), shallow enough to be trained with random initialisation.Then, when training deeper architectures, we initialised the first four convolutional layers and thelast three fully-connected layers with the layers of net A (the intermediate layers were initialisedrandomly).
We did not decrease the learning rate for the pre-initialised layers, allowing them tochange during learning. For random initialisation (where applicable), we sampled the weights froma normal distribution with the zero mean and 10−2 variance. The biases were initialised with zero.We note that it might be possible to appropriately initialise learning without pre-training, e.g. byadjusting the random initialisation procedure [15].

…

Even though a stack of convolutional layers is able to capture multi-scale statistics, in our exper-iments we trained each architecture at multiple scales using the following procedure. Given aConvNet configuration, we first trained the network using S = 256, i.e. on 224 × 224 imagescropped out of 256 × N images (N ≥ 256).
We then trained another network with the same layerconfiguration, but using 224 × 224 crops from larger images (S = 384). To speed-up training, itwas initialised with the weights pre-trained with S = 256, and we used a smaller initial learningrate of 10−3 . An alternative way of multi-scale training, which was also evaluated, corresponds torandomly sampling the smallest image side S from a certain range [Smin ; Smax ], independently foreach training image.
This can be seen as training set augmentation by scale jittering.3.2 TestingAt test time, given a trained ConvNet and an input image, it is classified in the following way. First,it is isotropically rescaled so that the smallest side equals Q ≥ 224, which is not necessarily equal toS (as we will show in Sect. 4, using several values of Q for each S leads to improved performance).
Then, the network is applied densely over the rescaled test image in a way similar to [16]. Namely,the fully-connected layers are first converted to the convolutional layers (the first FC layer – to a 7×7conv. layer, the last two FC layers – to 1 × 1 conv. layers).
The resulting net, which now containsonly conv. layers, is applied to the whole (uncropped) image by convolving the filters in each layerwith the full-size input. The resulting output feature map is a class score map with the number ofchannels equal to the number of classes, and the variable spatial resolution, dependent on the inputimage size.

…

44 Classification ExperimentsDataset. In this section, we present the image classification results achieved by the describedConvNet architectures on the ILSVRC-2012 dataset (which was used for 2012–2014 ILSVRC chal-lenges). The dataset includes images of 1000 classes, and is split into three sets: training (1.3Mimages), validation (50K images), and testing (100K images with held-out class labels).
The clas-sification performance is evaluated using two measures: the top-1 and top-5 error. The formeris a multi-class classification error, i.e. the ratio of incorrectly classified images; the latter is themain evaluation criterion used in the ILSVRC, and is computed as the ratio of images such that theground-truth category is not within the top-5 categories.For the majority of experiments, we used the validation set as the test set.

…

2.2. The results of single-scale testing are shown in Table 3. First, we notethat using local response normalisation (A-LRN network) does not improve on the model A withoutany normalisation layers. We thus do not employ normalisation in the deeper architectures (B–E).Second, we observe that the classification error decreases with the increased ConvNet depth: from11 layers in A to 16 layers in D.
Increasing the number of layers further to 19 (in E) does not im-prove the performance. Interestingly, in spite of the same depth, the configuration C (which containsthree 1 × 1 conv. layers), performs worse than the configuration D, which uses 3 × 3 conv. layersthroughout the network.
This indicates that while the additional non-linearity does help (C is betterthan B), it also important to capture spatial context by using conv. filters with non-trivial receptivefields (D is better than C).It should also be noted that the ConvNets trained on larger 384 × N images (S = 384, Sect.
3.1)perform better than the nets trained on 256 × N images. A possible reason could be that 384 × Nnets were obtained by fine-tuning 256 × N nets (Sect. 3), which effectively increases the amountof training data. Additionally, dense ConvNet computation over larger 384 × N test images resultsin higher spatial resolution of the class score map (Sect. 3.2), so the final (sum-pooled) class scoresaccumulate a larger numbers of decisions.

…

Such scale jittering at training time allows the network to be applied to a widerrange of scales at test time, which results in the best single-network performance of 25.9%/8.0%top-1/top-5 error (highlighted in bold in Table 4).

…

For this we adopt the approach of [16], the winners ofILSVRC-2013 localisation challenge, with a few modifications. Our method is described in Sect. 5.1and evaluated in Sect. 5.2.5.1 Localisation ConvNetTo perform object localisation, we use a very deep ConvNet, where the last fully connected layerpredicts the bounding box location instead of predicting class scores.
A bounding box is representedby a 4-D vector storing its center coordinates, width, and height. There is a choice of whether thebounding box prediction is shared across all classes (single-class regression, SCR [16]) or is class-specific (per-class regression, PCR). In the former case, the last layer is 4-D, while in the latter it is4000-D (since there are 1000 classes in the dataset).
Apart from the last bounding box prediction layer, we use the ConvNet architecture D (Table 1),which contains 16 weight layers and was found to be the best-performing in the classification task(Sect. 4). This allows us to speed-up training by initialising with a pre-trained classification net.

…

3.2). The difference is thatinstead of the class score map, the output of the last fully-connected layer is a set of bounding boxpredictions. To come up with the final prediction, we utilise the greedy merging procedure of [16],which first merges spatially close predictions (by averaging their coordinates), and then rates them

…

We did not use the multiple pooling offsets technique of [16],which allows to increase the spatial resolution of the bounding box predictions by compensating forthe loss of resolution after spatial pooling.5.2 Localisation ExperimentsIn this section we first determine the best-performing localisation setting, and then evaluate it in afully-fledged setting, where the labels are not known and are predicted by the classification Con-vNet, and the bounding box prediction is done based on the whole image.

…

Settings comparison. As can be seen from Table 7, per-class regression (PCR) outperforms theclass-agnostic single-class regression (SCR), which, interestingly, differs from the findings of [16],where PCR was outperformed by SCR. We also note that fine-tuning all layers for the localisa-tion task leads to noticeably better results than fine-tuning only the fully-connected layers (as donein [16]). In these experiments, the smallest images side was set to S = 384; the results with S = 256exhibit the same behaviour and are not shown for brevity.
Table 7: Localisation error for different modifications with the simplified testing protocol: thebounding box is predicted from a single central image crop, and the ground-truth class is used. AllConvNet layers (except for the last one) have the configuration D (Table 1), while the last layerperforms either single-class regression (SCR) or per-class regression (PCR). Fine-tuned layers regression type GT class localisation error SCR 36.4 1st and 2nd FC PCR 34.3 all PCR 33.1
Fully-fledged evaluation. Having determined the best localisation setting (PCR, fine-tuning of alllayers), we now apply it in the fully-fledged scenario, where the top-5 class labels are predicted usingour best-performing classification system (Sect. 4.4), and multiple densely-computed bounding boxpredictions are merged using the method of [16].
As can be seen from Table 8, application ofthe localisation ConvNet to the whole image substantially improves the results compared to usinga center crop (Table 7), despite using the top-5 predicted class labels instead of the ground truth.Similarly to the classification task (Sect. 4), testing at several scales and combining the predictionsof multiple networks further improves the performance.
Comparison with the state of the art. We compare our best localisation result with the stateof the art in Table 9. With 25.3% test error, our “VGG” team has won the localisation challengeof ILSVRC-2014 [14]. Notably, our results are considerably better than those of the ILSVRC-2013 winner Overfeat [16], even though we used less scales and did not employ their predictionresolution enhancement technique.
We envisage that better localisation performance can be achievedif this technique is incorporated into our method. This indicates the performance advancementbrought by our very deep ConvNets – we got better results with a simpler localisation method,but a more powerful representation. For reference, we also report the results of our submissionto ILSVRC-2013, achieved using a much smaller ConvNet model (akin to [10]) and with weaksupervision, i.e. without using the ground-truth bounding boxes.

…

[10] - 34.2 VGG-2013 [18] (weakly-supervised) - 46.46 ConclusionIn this work we evaluated very deep convolutional networks (up to 19 weight layers) for large-scale image classification. It was demonstrated that the representation depth is beneficial for theclassification accuracy, and that the state-of-the-art performance on the ImageNet challenge datasetcan be achieved using a conventional ConvNet architecture [10, 11] with substantially increaseddepth.