# Source: https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.00020
# Author: Alec Radford et al.
# Title: Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision (CLIP)
# Fetched via: search
# Date: 2026-04-09

Abstract:State-of-the-art computer vision systems are trained to predict a fixed set of predetermined object categories.
This restricted form of supervision limits their generality and usability since additional labeled data is needed to specify any other visual concept.
Learning directly from raw text about images is a promising alternative which leverages a much broader source of supervision.
We demonstrate that the simple pre-training task of predicting which caption goes with which image is an efficient and scalable way to learn SOTA image representations from scratch on a dataset of 400 million (image, text) pairs collected from the internet.
After pre-training, natural language is used to reference learned visual concepts (or describe new ones) enabling zero-shot transfer of the model to downstream tasks.
We study the performance of this approach by benchmarking on over 30 different existing computer vision datasets, spanning tasks such as OCR, action recognition in videos, geo-localization, and many types of fine-grained object classification.
The model transfers non-trivially to most tasks and is often competitive with a fully supervised baseline without the need for any dataset specific training.
For instance, we match the accuracy of the original ResNet-50 on ImageNet zero-shot without needing to use any of the 1.28 million training examples it was trained on.
We release our code and pre-trained model weights at this https URL.

Abstract
SOTA computer vision systems are trained to pre-
dict a fixed set of predetermined object categories.
This restricted form of supervision limits their
generality and usability since additional labeled
data is needed to specify any other visual con-
cept. Learning directly from raw text about im-
ages is a promising alternative which leverages a
much broader source of supervision. We demon-
strate that the simple pre-training task of predict-
ing which caption goes with which image is an
efficient and scalable way to learn SOTA image
representations from scratch on a dataset of 400
million (image, text) pairs collected from the inter-
net. After pre-training, natural language is used to
reference learned visual concepts (or describe new
ones) enabling zero-shot transfer of the model to
downstream tasks. We study performance on over
30 different computer vision datasets, spanning
tasks such as OCR, action recognition in videos,
geo-localization, and many types of fine-grained
object classification. The model transfers non-
trivially to most tasks and is often competitive
with a fully supervised baseline without the need
for any dataset specific training. For instance, we
match the accuracy of the original ResNet50 on
ImageNet zero-shot without needing to use any of
the 1.28 million training examples it was trained

…

tended this approach to predicting phrase n-grams in ad-
dition to individual words and demonstrated the ability of
their system to zero-shot transfer to other image classifi-
cation datasets. Adopting more recent architectures and
pre-training approaches, VirTex (Desai & Johnson, 2020),
ICMLM (Bulent Sariyildiz et al., 2020), and ConVIRT

…

celerator days on one to two hundred thousand images. We
close this gap and study the behaviors of image models
trained from natural language supervision at large scale. We
demonstrate that a simplified version of ConVIRT trained
from scratch, which we call CLIP, for Contrastive Language-
Image Pre-training, is an efficient and scalable method of
learning from natural language supervision. We find that

…

I2·TN
I3·TN
⋮
…
IN
…
⋮
⋱
IN·TN
I1·T3
Figure 1. Summary of our approach. While standard image models jointly train an image feature extractor and a linear classifier to predict
some label, CLIP jointly trains an image encoder and a text encoder to predict the correct pairings of a batch of (image, text) training
examples. At test time the learned text encoder synthesizes a zero-shot linear classifier by embedding the names or descriptions of the
target dataset’s classes.
CLIP learns to perform a wide set of tasks during pre-
training including OCR, geo-localization, action recogni-
tion, and outperforms the best publicly available ImageNet
model while being more computationally efficient. We also
find that zero-shot CLIP models are much more robust than
equivalent accuracy supervised ImageNet models.
2. Approach
At the core of our work is the idea of learning perception
from the supervision contained in natural language paired
with images. In the following subsections we detail our

…

Our initial approach, similar to VirTex, jointly trained an
image CNN and text transformer from scratch to predict
the caption of an image. However, we encountered difficul-
ties efficiently scaling this method. In Figure 2 we show
that a 63 million parameter transformer language model,
which already uses twice the compute of its ResNet50 im-

…

Bag of Words Contrastive (CLIP)
Bag of Words Prediction
Transformer Language Model
Figure 2. CLIP is much more efficient at zero-shot transfer
than our image caption baseline. Although highly expressive,
we found that transformer-based language models are relatively
weak at zero-shot ImageNet classification. Here, we see that it
learns 3x slower than a baseline which predicts a bag-of-words
(BoW) encoding of the text (Joulin et al., 2016). Swapping the
prediction objective for the contrastive objective of CLIP further
improves efficiency another 4x.
we explored training a system to solve the potentially eas-

…

Given a batch of N (image, text) pairs, CLIP is trained to
predict which of the N × N possible (image, text) pairings
across a batch actually occurred. To do this, CLIP learns a
multi-modal embedding space by jointly training an image
encoder and text encoder to maximize the cosine similar-
ity of the image and text embeddings of the N real pairs
in the batch while minimizing the cosine similarity of the
embeddings of the N 2 −N incorrect pairings. We optimize
a symmetric cross entropy loss over these similarity scores.
In Figure 3 we include pseudocode for the core of an imple-
mentation of CLIP. This batch construction technique and
objective was first introduced as the multi-class N-pair loss
Sohn (2016) and was recently adapted for contrastive (text,
image) representation learning in the domain of medical
imaging by Zhang et al. (2020).
Since over-fitting is not a major concern, the details of train-
ing CLIP are simplified compared to Zhang et al. (2020).
We train CLIP from scratch instead of initializing with pre-
trained weights. We remove the non-linear projection be-
tween the representation and the contrastive embedding
space. We use only a linear projection to map from each en-
coder’s representation to the multi-modal embedding space.

…

# W_t[d_t, d_e] - learned proj of text to embed
# t             - learned temperature parameter
# extract feature representations of each modality
I_f = image_encoder(I) #[n, d_i]
T_f = text_encoder(T)  #[n, d_t]
# joint multimodal embedding [n, d_e]
I_e = l2_normalize(np.dot(I_f, W_i), axis=1)
T_e = l2_normalize(np.dot(T_f, W_t), axis=1)
# scaled pairwise cosine similarities [n, n]
logits = np.dot(I_e, T_e.T) * np.exp(t)

# symmetric loss function
labels = np.arange(n)
loss_i = cross_entropy_loss(logits, labels, axis=0)
loss_t = cross_entropy_loss(logits, labels, axis=1)
loss   = (loss_i + loss_t)/2
Figure 3. Numpy-like pseudocode for the core of an implementa-
tion of CLIP.
We also remove the text transformation function tu which
samples a single sentence at uniform from the text since
many of the (image, text) pairs in CLIP’s pre-training dataset
are only a single sentence. We also simplify the image trans-
formation function tv. A random square crop from resized

…

tional compute equally to increasing the width, depth, and
resolution of the model. For the text encoder, we only scale
the width of the model to be proportional to the calculated
increase in width of the ResNet and do not scale the depth
at all, as we found CLIP’s performance to be less sensitive
to the text encoder.
2.4. Pre-training
We train a series of 5 ResNets and 3 Vision Transformers.
For the ResNets we train a ResNet50, a ResNet101, and
then 3 more which follow EfficientNet-style model scaling
and use approximately 4x, 16x, and 64x the compute of a

…

specified, all results reported in this paper as “CLIP” use
this model which we found to perform best. Full model
hyperparameters and details are in supplementary material.
2.5. Using CLIP
CLIP is pre-trained to predict if an image and a text snip-
pet are paired together in WIT. To apply CLIP to down-
stream tasks, we reuse this capability and study the zero-
shot transfer performance of CLIP on standard computer
vision datasets. Similar to Radford et al. (2019) we motivate
aYahoo
ImageNet
SUN
Visual N-Grams
72.4
11.5
23.0
CLIP
98.4
76.2
58.5
Table 1. Comparing CLIP to prior zero-shot transfer image classi-
fication work. CLIP improves performance on all three datasets by
a large amount. This improvement reflects many differences since
the development of Visual N-Grams (Li et al., 2017).
this as a way of measuring the task learning capability of a
system (as opposed to its representation learning capability).
For each dataset, we use the names of all the classes in the
dataset as the set of potential text pairings and predict the
most probable (image, text) pair according to CLIP. We addi-
tionally experiment with providing CLIP with text prompts
to help specify the task as well as ensembling multiple of
these templates in order to boost performance. However,
since the vast majority of unsupervised and self-supervised
computer vision research focuses on representation learning,
we also investigate this for CLIP using the common linear

…

fer to standard image classification datasets using a task
agnostic pre-trained model. In Table 1 we compare Visual
N-Grams to CLIP. The best CLIP model improves accuracy
on ImageNet from a proof of concept 11.5% to 76.2% and
matches the performance of the original ResNet50 despite
using none of the 1.28 million crowd-labeled training exam-
ples. Additionally, the top-5 accuracy of CLIP models are
noticeably higher and this model has a 95% top-5 accuracy,
matching Inception-V4 (Szegedy et al., 2016). The abil-
ity to match the performance of a strong, fully supervised
baseline in a zero-shot setting suggests CLIP is a signifi-
cant step towards flexible and practical zero-shot computer
vision classifiers. This comparison is not direct because
many differences between CLIP and Visual N-Grams were
not controlled for. As a closer comparison, we trained a

…

material. In total we expand from the 3 datasets reported in
Visual N-Grams to include over 30 datasets and compare to
over 50 existing computer vision systems to contextualize
results. To start, we look at how well CLIP’s zero-shot clas-
sifiers perform when compared to the a simple off-the-shelf
baseline: fitting a fully supervised, regularized, logistic re-
gression classifier on the features of the canonical ResNet50.
In Figure 4 we show this comparison across 27 datasets.
Zero-shot CLIP outperforms this baseline slightly and wins
on 16 of the 27 datasets. The dataset zero-shot CLIP im-

…

We speculate this is due to natural language providing wider
supervision for visual concepts involving verbs, compared
to the noun-centric object supervision in ImageNet.
Looking at where zero-shot CLIP notably underperforms,
we see that zero-shot CLIP is quite weak on several spe-
cialized, complex, or abstract tasks such as satellite image

…

opposed to few-shot transfer, is a meaningful evaluation for
difficult tasks that a learner has no prior experience with,
such as lymph node tumor classification for almost all hu-
mans (and possibly CLIP).
While comparing zero-shot performance to fully supervised
models contextualizes the task-learning capabilities of CLIP,
comparing to few-shot methods is a more direct comparison,
since zero-shot is its limit. In Figure 5, we visualize how
zero-shot CLIP compares to few-shot logistic regression on

…

methods, and CLIP itself. While one might expect zero-shot
to underperform one-shot, we instead find that zero-shot
CLIP matches the performance of 4-shot logistic regression
on the same feature space. This is likely due to a key dif-
ference between the zero-shot and few-shot approach. First,
CLIP’s zero-shot classifier is generated via natural language
which allows for visual concepts to be directly specified
(“communicated”). By contrast, “normal” supervised learn-
ing must infer concepts indirectly from training examples.
Context-less example-based learning has the drawback that
many different hypotheses can be consistent with the data,
especially in the one-shot case. A single image often con-
tains many different visual concepts. Although a capable
learner is able to exploit visual cues and heuristics, such as
assuming that the concept being demonstrated is the primary
object in an image, there is no guarantee.
When comparing zero-shot CLIP to few-shot logistic re-

…

average across 27 datasets.
3.3. Representation Learning
While we have focused on studying the task-learning capa-
bilities of CLIP through zero-shot transfer, it is more com-
mon to study the representation learning capabilities of a
model. We use a linear probe evaluation protocol because it
requires minimal hyper-parameter tuning and has standard-

…

CLIP scale very well with compute and our largest model
slightly outperforms the best existing model (a Noisy Stu-
dent EfficientNet-L2) on both overall score and compute
efficiency. We also find that CLIP vision transformers are
about 3x more compute efficient than CLIP ResNets, which

…

suite by an average of 2.6%.
CLIP models learn a wider set of tasks than has previously
been demonstrated in a single computer vision model trained
end-to-end from random initialization. These tasks include
geo-localization, optical character recognition, facial emo-
tion recognition, and action recognition. None of these

…

are more clear. All CLIP models, regardless of scale, outper-
form all evaluated systems in terms of compute efficiency.
The improvement in average score of the best model over
previous systems increases from 2.6% to 5%.
3.4. Robustness to Natural Distribution Shift
In 2015, it was announced that a deep learning model ex-

…

zero-shot models exhibit higher effective robustness. In
Figure 7, we compare the performance of zero-shot CLIP
with existing ImageNet models on natural distribution shifts.
All zero-shot CLIP models improve effective robustness
by a large amount and reduce the gap between ImageNet
accuracy and accuracy under distribution shift by up to
75%. Zero-shot CLIP models trace a completely distinct
robustness frontier from all 204 prior models studied in
Taori et al. (2020). These results suggest that the recent shift
towards large-scale task and dataset agnostic pre-training
combined with a reorientation towards zero-shot transfer
evaluation (as advocated by Yogatama et al. (2019) and
Linzen (2020)) promotes the development of more robust
systems and provides a more accurate assessment of true
model performance.

…

80
85
90
95
100
Average on 7 natural distribution shift datasets (top-1, %)
Ideal robust model (y = x)
Zero-Shot CLIP
Standard ImageNet training
Exisiting robustness techniques
ImageNet
ImageNetV2
ImageNet-A
ImageNet-R

…

CLIP
0%
+5.8%
+74.4%
+51.2%
+39.7%
+35.0%
Δ Score
Dataset Examples
Figure 7. Zero-shot CLIP is much more robust to distribution shift than standard ImageNet models. (Left) An ideal robust model
(dashed line) performs equally well on the ImageNet distribution and on other natural image distributions. Zero-shot CLIP models shrink
this “robustness gap” by up to 75%. Linear fits on logit transformed values are shown with bootstrap estimated 95% confidence intervals.
(Right) Visualizing distribution shift for bananas, a class shared across 5 of the 7 natural distribution shift datasets. The performance of

…

Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision
queried performance on validation sets to guide develop-
ment. This is unrealistic for true zero-shot scenarios. Similar
concerns have been raised in the field of semi-supervised
learning (Oliver et al., 2018). Another potential issue is our
selection of evaluation datasets. While we report results

Abstract
State-of-the-art computer vision systems are
trained to predict a fixed set of predetermined
object categories. This restricted form of super-
vision limits their generality and usability since
additional labeled data is needed to specify any
other visual concept. Learning directly from raw
text about images is a promising alternative which
leverages a much broader source of supervision.
We demonstrate that the simple pre-training task
of predicting which caption goes with which im-
age is an efficient and scalable way to learn SOTA
image representations from scratch on a dataset
of 400 million (image, text) pairs collected from
the internet. After pre-training, natural language
is used to reference learned visual concepts (or
describe new ones) enabling zero-shot transfer
of the model to downstream tasks. We study
the performance of this approach by benchmark-
ing on over 30 different existing computer vi-
sion datasets, spanning tasks such as OCR, action
recognition in videos, geo-localization, and many
types of fine-grained object classification. The
model transfers non-trivially to most tasks and is
often competitive with a fully supervised baseline
without the need for any dataset specific training.
For instance, we match the accuracy of the orig-
inal ResNet-50 on ImageNet zero-shot without
needing to use any of the 1.28 million training

…

that pre-training AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) to pre-
dict these labels learned representations which preformed
similarly to ImageNet-based pre-training on transfer tasks.
Li et al. (2017) then extended this approach to predicting
phrase n-grams in addition to individual words and demon-
strated the ability of their system to zero-shot transfer to
other image classification datasets by scoring target classes
based on their dictionary of learned visual n-grams and

…

I2·TN
I3·TN
⋮
…
IN
…
⋮
⋱
IN·TN
I1·T3
Figure 1. Summary of our approach. While standard image models jointly train an image feature extractor and a linear classifier to predict
some label, CLIP jointly trains an image encoder and a text encoder to predict the correct pairings of a batch of (image, text) training

…

also demonstrated large gains on a broader set of transfer
benchmarks by pre-training models to predict the classes of
the noisily labeled JFT-300M dataset.
This line of work represents the current pragmatic middle
ground between learning from a limited amount of super-
vised “gold-labels” and learning from practically unlimited

…

perform prediction and lack a mechanism for dynamic out-
puts. This severely curtails their flexibility and limits their
“zero-shot” capabilities.
A crucial difference between these weakly supervised mod-
els and recent explorations of learning image representations
directly from natural language is scale. While Mahajan et al.
(2018) and Kolesnikov et al. (2019) trained their models for

…

on the internet, we create a new dataset of 400 million (im-
age, text) pairs and demonstrate that a simplified version of
ConVIRT trained from scratch, which we call CLIP, for Con-
trastive Language-Image Pre-training, is an efficient method
of learning from natural language supervision. We study
the scalability of CLIP by training a series of eight models
spanning almost 2 orders of magnitude of compute and ob-
serve that transfer performance is a smoothly predictable
function of compute (Hestness et al., 2017; Kaplan et al.,
2020). We find that CLIP, similar to the GPT family, learns
to perform a wide set of tasks during pre-training including
OCR, geo-localization, action recognition, and many others.
We measure this by benchmarking the zero-shot transfer
performance of CLIP on over 30 existing datasets and find
it can be competitive with prior task-specific supervised
models. We also confirm these findings with linear-probe
Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision
3
representation learning analysis and show that CLIP out-
performs the best publicly available ImageNet model while
also being more computationally efficient. We additionally
find that zero-shot CLIP models are much more robust than
equivalent accuracy supervised ImageNet models which

…

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Zero-Shot ImageNet Accuracy
3X efficiency
4X efficiency
Bag of Words Contrastive (CLIP)
Bag of Words Prediction
Transformer Language Model
Figure 2. CLIP is much more efficient at zero-shot transfer

…

prediction objective for the contrastive objective of CLIP further
improves efficiency another 4x.
2. Approach
2.1. Natural Language Supervision
At the core of our approach is the idea of learning percep-
tion from supervision contained in natural language. As
discussed in the introduction, this is not at all a new idea,

…

duce methods which learn visual representations from text
paired with images but describe their approaches as unsuper-
vised, self-supervised, weakly supervised, and supervised
respectively.
We emphasize that what is common across this line of work
is not any of the details of the particular methods used but
the appreciation of natural language as a training signal. All
these approaches are learning from natural language super-
vision. Although early work wrestled with the complexity
of natural language when using topic model and n-gram
representations, improvements in deep contextual represen-
tation learning suggest we now have the tools to effectively
leverage this abundant source of supervision (McCann et al.,

…

Student EfficientNet-L2. When considering that both these
systems were trained to predict only 1000 ImageNet classes,
the task of learning an open set of visual concepts from
natural language seems daunting. In the course of our ef-
forts, we found training efficiency was key to successfully
scaling natural language supervision and we selected our
final pre-training method based on this metric.
Our initial approach, similar to VirTex, jointly trained an
image CNN and text transformer from scratch to predict the
caption of an image. However, we encountered difficulties
efficiently scaling this method. In Figure 2 we show that a
63 million parameter transformer language model, which

…

image and not the exact words of that text. Starting with
the same bag-of-words encoding baseline, we swapped the
predictive objective for a contrastive objective in Figure 2
and observed a further 4x efficiency improvement in the rate
of zero-shot transfer to ImageNet.
Given a batch of N (image, text) pairs, CLIP is trained to

…

(2020). We train CLIP from scratch without initializing
the image encoder with ImageNet weights or the text en-
coder with pre-trained weights. We remove the non-linear
projection between the representation and the contrastive
embedding space, a change which was introduced by Bach-
man et al. (2019) and popularized by Chen et al. (2020b).
We use only a linear projection to map from each encoder’s
representation to the multi-modal embedding space. We
did not notice a difference in training efficiency between
the two versions and speculate that non-linear projections
may be co-adapted with details of current image only self-
supervised representation learning methods. We also re-

…

# symmetric loss function
labels = np.arange(n)
loss_i = cross_entropy_loss(logits, labels, axis=0)
loss_t = cross_entropy_loss(logits, labels, axis=1)
loss   = (loss_i + loss_t)/2
Figure 3. Numpy-like pseudocode for the core of an implementa-

…

RN50x64 respectively. For the Vision Transformers we
train a ViT-B/32, a ViT-B/16, and a ViT-L/14. We train all
models for 32 epochs. We use the Adam optimizer (Kingma
& Ba, 2014) with decoupled weight decay regularization
(Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) applied to all weights that are
not gains or biases, and decay the learning rate using a
cosine schedule (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2016). Initial hyper-
parameters were set using a combination of grid searches,
random search, and manual tuning on the baseline ResNet-

…

ically pre-trained model and serves as the best reference
point for contextualizing CLIP. Their approach learns the
parameters of a dictionary of 142,806 visual n-grams (span-
ning 1- to 5- grams) and optimizes these n-grams using a
differential version of Jelinek-Mercer smoothing to maxi-

…

training as a transfer learning method to improve supervised
fine-tuning, it also included an ablation study demonstrat-
ing that the performance of four heuristic zero-shot transfer
methods improved steadily over the course of pre-training,
without any supervised adaption. This analysis served as the
basis for GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) which focused exclu-
sively on studying the task-learning capabilities of language
models via zero-shot transfer.
3.1.2. USING CLIP FOR ZERO-SHOT TRANSFER
CLIP is pre-trained to predict if an image and a text snippet
are paired together in its dataset. To perform zero-shot clas-
sification, we reuse this capability. For each dataset, we use
the names of all the classes in the dataset as the set of poten-
tial text pairings and predict the most probable (image, text)
pair according to CLIP. In a bit more detail, we first compute
the feature embedding of the image and the feature embed-
ding of the set of possible texts by their respective encoders.

…

example per class and has 32,768 total classes defined via
natural language descriptions. For zero-shot evaluation, we
cache the zero-shot classifier once it has been computed by
the text encoder and reuse it for all subsequent predictions.
This allows the cost of generating it to be amortized across
all the predictions in a dataset.
3.1.3. INITIAL COMPARISON TO VISUAL N-GRAMS
In Table 1 we compare Visual N-Grams to CLIP. The best
CLIP model improves accuracy on ImageNet from a proof
of concept 11.5% to 76.2% and matches the performance
of the original ResNet-50 despite using none of the 1.28
million crowd-labeled training examples available for this
dataset. Additionally, the top-5 accuracy of CLIP models
are noticeably higher than their top-1, and this model has a
95% top-5 accuracy, matching Inception-V4 (Szegedy et al.,
2016). The ability to match the performance of a strong,
fully supervised baselines in a zero-shot setting suggests

…

model that requires nearly 100x more compute per predic-
tion, likely used over 1000x their training compute, and
use a transformer-based model which did not exist when
Visual N-Grams was published. As a closer comparison, we
trained a CLIP ResNet-50 on the same YFCC100M dataset

…

ported datasets. On aYahoo, CLIP achieves a 95% reduction
in the number of errors, and on SUN, CLIP more than dou-
bles the accuracy of Visual N-Grams. To conduct a more
comprehensive analysis and stress test, we implement a
much larger evaluation suite detailed in Appendix A. In

…

neering and ensembling change the performance of a set of
CLIP models compared to the contextless baseline approach
of directly embedding the class name as done in Li et al.
(2017).
3.1.5. ANALYSIS OF ZERO-SHOT CLIP PERFORMANCE
Since task-agnostic zero-shot classifiers for computer vision

Abstract
State-of-the-art computer vision systems are
trained to predict a fixed set of predetermined
object categories. This restricted form of super-
vision limits their generality and usability since
additional labeled data is needed to specify any
other visual concept. Learning directly from raw
text about images is a promising alternative which
leverages a much broader source of supervision.
We demonstrate that the simple pre-training task
of predicting which caption goes with which im-
age is an efficient and scalable way to learn SOTA
image representations from scratch on a dataset
of 400 million (image, text) pairs collected from
the internet. After pre-training, natural language
is used to reference learned visual concepts (or
describe new ones) enabling zero-shot transfer
of the model to downstream tasks. We study
the performance of this approach by benchmark-
ing on over 30 different existing computer vi-
sion datasets, spanning tasks such as OCR, ac-
tion recognition in videos, geo-localization, and
many types of fine-grained object classification.
The model transfers non-trivially to most tasks
and is often competitive with a fully supervised
baseline without the need for any dataset spe-
cific training. For instance, we match the ac-
curacy of the original ResNet-50 on ImageNet
zero-shot without needing to use any of the 1.28

…

I2·TN
I3·TN
⋮
…
IN
…
⋮
⋱
IN·TN
I1·T3
Figure 1. Summary of our approach. While standard image models jointly train an image feature extractor and a linear classifier to predict
some label, CLIP jointly trains an image encoder and a text encoder to predict the correct pairings of a batch of (image, text) training
examples. At test time the learned text encoder synthesizes a zero-shot linear classifier by embedding the names or descriptions of the
target dataset’s classes.
classification datasets by scoring target classes based on
their dictionary of learned visual n-grams and predicting the
one with the highest score. Adopting more recent architec-

…

ground between learning from a limited amount of super-
vised “gold-labels” and learning from practically unlimited
amounts of raw text. However, it is not without compro-
mises. Both works carefully design, and in the process limit,
their supervision to 1000 and 18291 classes respectively.
Natural language is able to express, and therefore supervise,
a much wider set of visual concepts through its general-
ity. Both approaches also use static softmax classifiers to
perform prediction and lack a mechanism for dynamic out-
puts. This severely curtails their flexibility and limits their
“zero-shot” capabilities.
A crucial difference between these weakly supervised mod-
els and recent explorations of learning image representations

…

this gap and study the behaviors of image classifiers trained
with natural language supervision at large scale. Enabled
by the large amounts of publicly available data of this form
on the internet, we create a new dataset of 400 million (im-
age, text) pairs and demonstrate that a simplified version of
ConVIRT trained from scratch, which we call CLIP, for Con-
trastive Language-Image Pre-training, is an efficient method
of learning from natural language supervision. We study
the scalability of CLIP by training a series of eight models
spanning almost 2 orders of magnitude of compute and ob-
serve that transfer performance is a smoothly predictable
function of compute (Hestness et al., 2017; Kaplan et al.,
2020). We find that CLIP, similar to the GPT family, learns
to perform a wide set of tasks during pre-training including
OCR, geo-localization, action recognition, and many others.
We measure this by benchmarking the zero-shot transfer
performance of CLIP on over 30 existing datasets and find

…

4X efficiency
Bag of Words Contrastive (CLIP)
Bag of Words Prediction
Transformer Language Model
Figure 2. CLIP is much more efficient at zero-shot transfer
than our image caption baseline. Although highly expressive,
we found that transformer-based language models are relatively
weak at zero-shot ImageNet classification. Here, we see that it
learns 3x slower than a baseline which predicts a bag-of-words
(BoW) encoding of the text (Joulin et al., 2016). Swapping the
prediction objective for the contrastive objective of CLIP further
improves efficiency another 4x.
it can be competitive with prior task-specific supervised
models. We also confirm these findings with linear-probe
representation learning analysis and show that CLIP out-
performs the best publicly available ImageNet model while
also being more computationally efficient. We additionally
find that zero-shot CLIP models are much more robust than
equivalent accuracy supervised ImageNet models which
suggests that zero-shot evaluation of task-agnostic models is
much more representative of a model’s capability. These re-
sults have significant policy and ethical implications, which
we consider in Section 7.
2. Approach
2.1. Natural Language Supervision
At the core of our approach is the idea of learning percep-

…

unsupervised or self-supervised learning approaches in that
it doesn’t “just” learn a representation but also connects that
representation to language which enables flexible zero-shot
transfer. In the following subsections, we detail the specific
approach we settled on.
2.2. Creating a Sufficiently Large Dataset

…

Student EfficientNet-L2. When considering that both these
systems were trained to predict only 1000 ImageNet classes,
the task of learning an open set of visual concepts from
natural language seems daunting. In the course of our ef-
forts, we found training efficiency was key to successfully
scaling natural language supervision and we selected our
final pre-training method based on this metric.
Our initial approach, similar to VirTex, jointly trained an
image CNN and text transformer from scratch to predict the
caption of an image. However, we encountered difficulties
efficiently scaling this method. In Figure 2 we show that a
63 million parameter transformer language model, which

…

image and not the exact words of that text. Starting with
the same bag-of-words encoding baseline, we swapped the
predictive objective for a contrastive objective in Figure 2
and observed a further 4x efficiency improvement in the rate
of zero-shot transfer to ImageNet.
Given a batch of N (image, text) pairs, CLIP is trained to

…

multi-modal embedding space by jointly training an image
encoder and text encoder to maximize the cosine similar-
ity of the image and text embeddings of the N real pairs
in the batch while minimizing the cosine similarity of the
embeddings of the N 2 −N incorrect pairings. We opti-
mize a symmetric cross entropy loss over these similarity

…

simplified compared to the implementation of Zhang et al.
(2020). We train CLIP from scratch without initializing the
image encoder with ImageNet weights or the text encoder
with pre-trained weights. We do not use the non-linear
projection between the representation and the contrastive
embedding space, a change which was introduced by Bach-

…

# symmetric loss function
labels = np.arange(n)
loss_i = cross_entropy_loss(logits, labels, axis=0)
loss_t = cross_entropy_loss(logits, labels, axis=1)
loss   = (loss_i + loss_t)/2
Figure 3. Numpy-like pseudocode for the core of an implementa-

…

train a ViT-B/32, a ViT-B/16, and a ViT-L/14. We train all
models for 32 epochs. We use the Adam optimizer (Kingma
& Ba, 2014) with decoupled weight decay regularization
(Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) applied to all weights that are
not gains or biases, and decay the learning rate using a
cosine schedule (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2016). Initial hyper-
parameters were set using a combination of grid searches,
random search, and manual tuning on the baseline ResNet-
50 model when trained for 1 epoch. Hyper-parameters were
then adapted heuristically for larger models due to compu-
tational constraints. The learnable temperature parameter
τ was initialized to the equivalent of 0.07 from (Wu et al.,
2018) and clipped to prevent scaling the logits by more
than 100 which we found necessary to prevent training in-

…

ically pre-trained model and serves as the best reference
point for contextualizing CLIP. Their approach learns the
parameters of a dictionary of 142,806 visual n-grams (span-
ning 1- to 5- grams) and optimizes these n-grams using a
differential version of Jelinek-Mercer smoothing to maxi-
mize the probability of all text n-grams for a given image.
In order to perform zero-shot transfer, they first convert the
text of each of the dataset’s class names into its n-gram
representation and then compute its probability according
to their model, predicting the one with the highest score.
Our focus on studying zero-shot transfer as an evaluation of

…

training as a transfer learning method to improve supervised
fine-tuning, it also included an ablation study demonstrat-
ing that the performance of four heuristic zero-shot transfer
methods improved steadily over the course of pre-training,
without any supervised adaption. This analysis served as the
basis for GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) which focused exclu-
sively on studying the task-learning capabilities of language
models via zero-shot transfer.
3.1.2. USING CLIP FOR ZERO-SHOT TRANSFER
CLIP is pre-trained to predict if an image and a text snippet
are paired together in its dataset. To perform zero-shot clas-
sification, we reuse this capability. For each dataset, we use
the names of all the classes in the dataset as the set of poten-
tial text pairings and predict the most probable (image, text)
pair according to CLIP. In a bit more detail, we first compute
the feature embedding of the image and the feature embed-
ding of the set of possible texts by their respective encoders.

…

example per class and has 32,768 total classes defined via
natural language descriptions. For zero-shot evaluation, we
cache the zero-shot classifier once it has been computed by
the text encoder and reuse it for all subsequent predictions.
This allows the cost of generating it to be amortized across
all the predictions in a dataset.
3.1.3. INITIAL COMPARISON TO VISUAL N-GRAMS
In Table 1 we compare Visual N-Grams to CLIP. The best
CLIP model improves accuracy on ImageNet from a proof
of concept 11.5% to 76.2% and matches the performance
of the original ResNet-50 despite using none of the 1.28
million crowd-labeled training examples available for this
dataset. Additionally, the top-5 accuracy of CLIP models
are noticeably higher than their top-1, and this model has a
95% top-5 accuracy, matching Inception-V4 (Szegedy et al.,
2016). The ability to match the performance of a strong,
fully supervised baselines in a zero-shot setting suggests

…

the comparison to Visual N-Grams is meant for contextu-
alizing the performance of CLIP and should not be inter-
preted as a direct methods comparison between CLIP and
Visual N-Grams as many performance relevant differences
between the two systems were not controlled for. For in-
stance, we train on a dataset that is 10x larger, use a vision
model that requires nearly 100x more compute per predic-
tion, likely used over 1000x their training compute, and
use a transformer-based model which did not exist when
Visual N-Grams was published. As a closer comparison, we
trained a CLIP ResNet-50 on the same YFCC100M dataset

…

ported datasets. On aYahoo, CLIP achieves a 95% reduction
in the number of errors, and on SUN, CLIP more than dou-
bles the accuracy of Visual N-Grams. To conduct a more
comprehensive analysis and stress test, we implement a
much larger evaluation suite detailed in Appendix A. In

…

4 times more compute with the baseline zero-shot method but is
“free” when amortized over many predictions.
chosen somewhat haphazardly and do not anticipate issues
related to zero-shot transfer which relies on task description
in order to transfer successfully.
A common issue is polysemy. When the name of a class

…

neering and ensembling change the performance of a set of
CLIP models compared to the contextless baseline approach
of directly embedding the class name as done in Li et al.
(2017).
3.1.5. ANALYSIS OF ZERO-SHOT CLIP PERFORMANCE
Since task-agnostic zero-shot classifiers for computer vision

It is demonstrated that the simple pre-training task of predicting which caption goes with which image is an efficient and scalable way to learn SOTA image representations from scratch on a dataset of 400 million (image, text) pairs collected from the internet.
## Topics
...
This work proposes K-LITE, a simple strategy to leverage external knowledge for building transferable visual systems that enriches entities in text with WordNet and Wiktionary knowledge, leading to an efficient and scalable approach to learning image representations that uses knowledge about the visual concepts.
...
This work proposes a data-efficient contrastive distillation method that uses soft labels to learn from noisy image-text pairs and exceeds the previous SoTA of general zero-shot learning on ImageNet 21k+1k by 73% relatively with a ResNet50 image encoder and DeCLUTR text encoder.
...
This paper shows that a simple Bag-of-Words (BoW) caption could be used as a replacement for most of the image captions in the dataset and observes that this approach improves the zero-shot classification performance when combined with word balancing.
...
This paper revise the role of the linear classiﬁer and replace the classiﬁer with the embedded language representations of the object categories and achieves the state-of-the-art accuracy of 87.3% on Kinetics-400.
...
A new framework is proposed, named Semantic-guided Visual Adapting (SgVA), which can effectively extend vision-language pre-trained models to produce discriminative adapted visual features by comprehensively using an implicit knowledge distillation, a vision-specific contrastive loss, and a cross-modal Contrastive loss.
…
...
This work proposes Vision-Language to Vision - Align, Distill, Predict (VL2V-ADiP), which first aligns the vision and language modalities of the teacher model with the vision modality of a pre-trained student model, and further distills the aligned VLM representations to the student.
...
It is argued that captioned images are easily crawlable and can be exploited to supervise the training of visual representations, and proposed hybrid models, with dedicated visual and textual encoders, show that the visual representations learned as a by-product of solving this task transfer well to a variety of target tasks.
...
This work proposes language-shaped learning (LSL), an end-to-end model that regularizes visual representations to predict language, which is conceptually simpler, more data efficient, and outperforms baselines in two challenging few-shot domains.
…