# Source: https://arxiv.org/html/2211.12112
# Author: Vitali Petsiuk et al.
# Title: Human Evaluation of Text-to-Image Models on a Multi-Task Benchmark
# Fetched via: search
# Date: 2026-04-09

Multi-Task Benchmark
Vitali Petsiuk
Boston University
vpetsiuk@bu.edu
Alexander Siemenn
MIT
asiemenn@mit.edu
Saisamrit Surbehera
Columbia University
ss6365@columbia.edu
Zad Chin
Harvard University
zadchin@college.harvard.edu

…

MIT
asolar@csail.mit.edu
Iddo Drori
MIT, Columbia University, Boston University
idrori@csail.mit.edu, idrori@cs.columbia.edu, idrori@bu.edu
Abstract
We provide a new multi-task benchmark for evaluating text-to-image models. We
perform a human evaluation comparing the most common open-source (Stable
Diffusion) and commercial (DALL-E 2) models. Twenty computer science AI
graduate students evaluated the two models, on three tasks, at three difficulty levels,
across ten prompts each, providing 3,600 ratings. Text-to-image generation has
seen rapid progress to the point that many recent models have demonstrated their
ability to create realistic high-resolution images for various prompts. However,
current text-to-image methods and the broader body of research in vision-language
understanding still struggle with intricate text prompts that contain many objects
with multiple attributes and relationships. We introduce a new text-to-image
benchmark that contains a suite of thirty-two tasks over multiple applications that
capture a model’s ability to handle different features of a text prompt. For example,
asking a model to generate a varying number of the same object to measure its
ability to count or providing a text prompt with several objects that each have a
different attribute to identify its ability to match objects and attributes correctly.
Rather than subjectively evaluating text-to-image results on a set of prompts, our
new multi-task benchmark consists of challenge tasks at three difficulty levels
(easy, medium, and hard) and human ratings for each generated image.
NeurIPS 2022 Workshop on Human Evaluation of Generative Models (HEGM).
arXiv:2211.12112v1  [cs.CV]  22 Nov 2022
1
Introduction
Spurred by large-scale pretraining on billions of image-text pairs, vision-language models have seen
rapid progress in recent years. Large-scale models like CLIP [8] and Flamingo [1] have reported
remarkable performance on dozens of benchmarks using a single model, even when using few or no

…

objects within novel contexts [11] such as different backgrounds, illumination, and poses. However,
these methods still need help generating images in complex scenes or where compositionality is
essential. A critical bottleneck in further progress is the need for rigorous evaluation protocols, as
current evaluation methods focus on prompts that do not fully account for the diverse settings these
models must support [12].
We propose a new text-to-image generation benchmark covering thirty-two tasks over multiple
applications, each targeting a different capability of text-to-image generation models as shown in
Table 2. For example, we may ask a model to produce varying numbers of an object to identify its
ability to count or to generate an image with an object of a specified shape. We divide each task
into three difficulty levels: easy, medium, and hard. For example, suppose the task is to synthesize
different numbers of objects. In that case, the task may be easy: generating 1-3 objects, medium -
generating 4-10 objects, and hard - generating more than ten objects. Next, we provide ten different
instances for each task difficulty level. These instances are specific prompts that implement the
tasks. We score text-to-image models on each of the thirty instances (ten for each of the three
difficulty levels) for each of the fifty tasks and applications. Specifically, we run our benchmark on
DALL-E 2 [9], and Stable Diffusion [10].
We can quantify and compare any new text-to-image generation model with our new benchmark. In
this work, we perform a human evaluation of three tasks. Note, however, that many of the tasks may
also be evaluated automatically, e.g. by a neural network. For instance, incorporating spatial-aware
methods ensures that prompts with spatial relationships and compositional elements are correctly
generated. Using OCR mechanisms ensures that quoted text is legible and accurate.
Our key contributions are: (i) developing challenge tasks for state-of-the-art text-to-image generative
models, (ii) defining human evaluation procedures , and (iii) Performing a human evaluation for a
subset of tasks with 3,600 human ratings, comparing the performance of two of the most common
open source (Stable Diffusion) and commercial (DALL-E 2) models.
2
Related Work
Text-to-image models may be roughly split into two types: autoregressive transformer-based models
[14] and diffusion-based models [12]. Prior state-of-the-art [2, 4, 5, 11] handles specific limitations of
text-to-image models, such as generating an image within the context or modifying object attributes
automatically. A comprehensive and quantitative multi-task benchmark for text-to-image synthesis
does not exist that covers a diverse set of tasks with varying difficulty levels. Our goal is to develop a
benchmark that will become the gold standard in the field for evaluating text-to-image models that
will endure time.
Text-to-image models are commonly evaluated by the Inception Score (IS) and the Fréchet Inception
Distance (FID). Both of these metrics are based on Inception v3 classifier. These measures, therefore,
are designed for the unconditional setting and are primarily trained on single-object images. We have
seen several approaches which rectify these shortcomings. Imagen [12] introduced DrawBench, a
benchmark with 11 categories with approximately 200 prompts total. Human raters (25 participants)
were asked to choose a better set of generated images from two models regarding image fidelity
and image-text alignment. Categories are: colors counting, conflicting, DALL-E 2, description,
misspellings, positional, rare words, Reddit, text.
DALL-Eval [3] proposed PaintSkills to test skills of the generative models — specified object
generation, counting, color, and spatial relations. It utilizes the Unity engine to test these tasks
1https://www.cosmopolitan.com/lifestyle/a40314356
2
Difficulty
Easy
Medium
Hard
Average
Task / Model
SD
DALL-E 2
SD
DALL-E 2
SD
DALL-E 2
SD
DALL-E 2
Counting
74.8
91.8
52.2
51.4
36.1
54.0
54.4
65.7
Faces
72.5
93.5
74.0
74.3
64.2
77.2
70.2
81.7
Shapes
70.8
67.1
56.8
46.0
45.1
57.3
57.6
56.8
Table 1: Normalized ratings (%) for human evaluation of Stable Diffusion and DALL-E 2 across the
three tasks of counting, shapes, and faces. DALL-E 2 outperforms Stable Diffusion on Counting
and Faces tasks, and Stable Diffusion shows a minor advantage on the shapes task. On 6 out of 9
sub-tasks, DALL-E 2 produces better images.
using predefined sets of objects, a subset of MS-COCO [6] objects, colors, and spatial relations. We
propose a more comprehensive benchmark of tasks at a finer level of detail, with three difficulty
levels. Localized Narratives [7] is a multi-modal image captioning approach that can be adapted
to benchmarking images. Text captions are first generated by human annotators whose cursor
movement and voice commentary hover their cursor over the image to provide richness and accuracy.
PartiPrompts, a holistic benchmark of 1,600 English prompts [13], compared to Localized Narratives,
is better in probing model capabilities on open-domain text-to-image generation. The 1,600 prompts
span 12 different categories and 11 challenge aspects. The 12 categories are artifacts, animals, indoor
scenes, produce and plants, abstract, arts, food & beverage, vehicles, illustrations, outdoor scenes,
people, and world knowledge, while the 11 challenge aspect are basic, fine-grained detail, properties
& positioning, linguistic structures, perspective, quantity, writing & symbols, complex, imagination,
style & format and simple detail. The image quality and the alignment of the generated image with
the input text are evaluated.
3
Methods
We create a comprehensive multi-task text-to-image generation benchmark of thirty-two diverse
tasks, as shown in Table 2. The motivation behind selecting benchmark tasks is to cover a wide

…

amounts of stock images for general audiences), (10) product design (quickly prototyping digital
and physical products), (11) illustrations (generating professional artwork for custom purposes),
(12) synthetic data (generating synthetic data for boosting training samples size), (13) social media
(generating memes and shareable content), (14) image recommendation (generating recommendations
based on user preferences), (15) gaming (using natural language to create complex scenes for video
games), (16) proteomics (designing new proteins visualizing existing structures), (17) material science
(designing new crystals).
We use the benchmark to compare different models, comparing Stable Diffusion [10] 2 and DALL-
E 2 [9], and identify their limitations. Our evaluation protocol consists of human ratings between
1 (worst) and 5 (best) of tasks at three difficulty levels. The three difficulty levels are currently
assigned heuristically based on the experience with failure modes of generative models. Examples
of cases in which human evaluation is required are: (i) concepts that are difficult to define, such as
successfully combining objects that are rarely co-occurring in the real world; (ii) complex tasks, such
as images that require common sense; and (iii) cases where human expertise is essential such as
generating images without racial or gender bias. We obtained 3,600 human ratings: twenty graduate
students, two models, three difficulty levels, and ten prompts each. The images were all generated
with identical default model parameters and evaluated on the same scale, scoring between 1 (worst)
and 5 (best).
2Publicly available https://beta.dreamstudio.ai/
3
Id
Task
1
Generating a specified number of objects
2
Generating objects with specified spatial positioning
3
Combining objects very rarely co-occurring in the world
4
Generating images obeying physical rendering rules of shadows, reflections, and acoustics
5
Generating objects with specified colors
6
Generating conflicting interactions between objects
7
Understanding complex and long text prompts describing objects
8
Understanding misspelled prompts
9
Handling absurd requests
10
Understanding rare words
11
Incorporating quoted text with correct spelling
12
Understanding negation and counter-examples
13
Understanding anaphora and phrases that refer to other parts of the prompt
14
Aligning text as specified in the prompt
15
Generating common-sense images
16
Removing objects without needing manual annotation
17
Removing content that is not child-safe
18
Editing the color of objects without marking them manually
19
Replacing objects without marking them manually
20
Generating objects with abstract shapes
21
Objects obeying physics rules
22
Generating images without racial or gender bias
23
Understanding comparative concepts like fewer and more
24
Photo-realistic faces
25
Understanding prompts regarding weather
26
Handling multi-lingual prompts
27
Duplicating objects perfectly
28
Generating multiple camera viewpoints of the same scene
29
Generating realistic faces with a specific emotion
30
Generating well-known faces
31
Generating a thumbnail summary for text and video
32
Changing dimensions of an image without losing information
Table 2: Multi-task text-to-image benchmark and applications: we propose a series of tasks on which
text-to-image models could be evaluated. The tasks are selected to cover a multitude of downstream
applications.
4
Results
We survey twenty students that evaluate the performance of Stable Diffusion and DALL-E 2. Each
student evaluated the three tasks at three levels of difficulty and ten prompts each, providing a rating
between 1 (worst) and 5 (best). We collected a total of 3,600 scores. The results are summarized
in Table 1, and a detailed breakdown of the evaluations by prompts are available in Table 3 of the
Appendix. Our human evaluation shows that DALL-E 2 (65.7%) performs better on the counting task
than Stable Diffusion (54.4%). On the Faces tasks, both models perform very well, and DALL-E 2
(81.7%) performs better than Stable Diffusion (70.2%), and on the Shapes task, both models perform
equally well (56.8% compared to 57.6%). Performance gracefully degrades as the tasks are more
difficult, except for DALL-E 2, which performs slightly better on the hard than on the medium Shapes
task.
5
Conclusion
We propose a new quantitative way of evaluating text-to-image generative models using a benchmark
covering many model competencies and applications. Initial human evaluation on a subset of
benchmark tasks shows a slight advantage of DALL-E 2 over Stable Diffusion. Our proposed
benchmark allows for testing individual competencies and limitations of the different generative
models. Understanding the limitations is critical for picking the suitable model for each task and
application, advancing the quality of generative models, and aligning their performance with human
goals.
4

…

Average:
72.70
84.13
61.00
57.23
48.47
62.83
Table 3: Normalized ratings (%) for human evaluation of Stable Diffusion and DALL-E 2 across the
three tasks of counting, shapes, and faces for each of the ten prompts.

…

three toy 
pyramids
Cup with 
three 
spoons 
sticking 
out of it
Three 
people 
crossing 
the street
Lioness 
hiding in 
the grass
DALL-E 2
Easy (1-3 typical number of objects)
Counting Task
Medium (4-10 atypical number of objects)

…

Person 
carrying a 
stack of 
twelve 
books
Two 
people 
juggling 
ten balls 
together
Office 
room with 
five desks 
and seven 
chairs
Drawing of 
a pyramid 
of ten 
champagne 
glasses
Coffee 
table with 
a five-by-

…

8
9
10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Figure 1: Evaluation of image generation on a counting task at various difficulties. Each panel
contains tasks with different difficulties. The columns correspond to the text prompt, and the rows
correspond to the model used to generate the image: (i) Stable Diffusion and (ii) DALL-E 2. The
prompts used to generate the images are classified into three different difficulties: (i) easy difficulty
tasks consisting of generating 1–3 objects, e.g., two cars, three people; (ii) medium difficulty tasks
consisting of generating 4–10 objects, including uncommon combinations of quantities and objects,
e.g., six bowling pins, seven fire hydrants; (iii) hard difficulty tasks consisting of 10 or more objects
with other numerical concepts in the prompt, e.g., twelve boats arranged in three rows.
7

…

Hard (multiple entities with specified shapes)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
2
3
4
5
10
6
7
8
9
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

…

shape by a 
hexagon 
shaped 
window
A 
triangular 
tree with 
heart 
shaped 
leaves
An 
octagon 
shaped 
cookie on 
a heart 
shaped 
plate
Figure 2: Evaluation of image generation on a shape task at various difficulties. Each panel contains
tasks at different difficulties where the columns correspond to the text prompt, and the rows correspond
to the model used to generate the image: (i) Stable Diffusion and (ii) DALL-E 2 The prompts used to
generate the images are classified into three different difficulties: (i) easy difficulty tasks consisting
of generating simple shapes, e.g., circle, star; (ii) medium difficulty tasks consisting of generating
entities in the form of a shape, e.g., hexagonal maze, octagonal TV; (iii) hard difficulty tasks consisting
of multiple entities, each of a specified shape, e.g., square-shaped water bottle next to a semicircular

…

Faces Task
Medium (1-2 faces with 1-3 features or actions)
Three 
young men 
doing 
handstands 
with one 
bald young 
man 
struggling 
to balance, 
one young 
man 
crying, and 
one young 
man 
smiling
Family 
reunion

…

1 to 3 features for each individual in a group of 1 to 2 people with easy angle and posture; (iii) hard:
given more than two features for each individual in a group of more than two people with challenging
angle, posture, lighting or occlusion. Asterisk (∗) indicates a failure to generate an image because of
the model’s content filters.
9

**arXiv:2211.12112v1** (cs)
[Submitted on 22 Nov 2022]
# Title: Human Evaluation of Text-to-Image Models on a Multi-Task Benchmark
Authors:Vitali Petsiuk, Alexander E. Siemenn, Saisamrit Surbehera, Zad Chin, Keith Tyser, Gregory Hunter, Arvind Raghavan, Yann Hicke, Bryan A. Plummer, Ori Kerret, Tonio Buonassisi, Kate Saenko, Armando Solar-Lezama, Iddo Drori
…
Abstract:We provide a new multi-task benchmark for evaluating text-to-image models.
We perform a human evaluation comparing the most common open-source (Stable Diffusion) and commercial (DALL-E 2) models.
Twenty computer science AI graduate students evaluated the two models, on three tasks, at three difficulty levels, across ten prompts each, providing 3,600 ratings.
Text-to-image generation has seen rapid progress to the point that many recent models have demonstrated their ability to create realistic high-resolution images for various prompts.
However, current text-to-image methods and the broader body of research in vision-language understanding still struggle with intricate text prompts that contain many objects with multiple attributes and relationships.
We introduce a new text-to-image benchmark that contains a suite of thirty-two tasks over multiple applications that capture a model's ability to handle different features of a text prompt.
For example, asking a model to generate a varying number of the same object to measure its ability to count or providing a text prompt with several objects that each have a different attribute to identify its ability to match objects and attributes correctly.
Rather than subjectively evaluating text-to-image results on a set of prompts, our new multi-task benchmark consists of challenge tasks at three difficulty levels (easy, medium, and hard) and human ratings for each generated image.
|Comments:|NeurIPS 2022 Workshop on Human Evaluation of Generative Models (HEGM)|
|--|--|
|Subjects:|Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (cs.CV); Artificial Intelligence (cs.AI); Machine Learning (cs.LG)|
|Cite as:|arXiv:2211.12112 [cs.CV]|
| |(or arXiv:2211.12112v1 [cs.CV] for this version)|
| |https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2211.12112 arXiv-issued DOI via DataCite|

MIT
asolar@csail.mit.edu
Iddo Drori
MIT, Columbia University, Boston University
idrori@csail.mit.edu, idrori@cs.columbia.edu, idrori@bu.edu
Abstract
We provide a new multi-task benchmark for evaluating text-to-image models and
perform a human evaluation comparing two of the most common open source
(Stable Diffusion) and commercial (DALL-E 2) models. Twenty computer science
AI graduate students evaluated the two models, on three tasks, at three difficulty
levels, across ten prompts each, providing 3,600 ratings. Text-to-image generation
has seen rapid progress to the point that many recent models have demonstrated
their ability to create realistic high-resolution images for various prompts. However,
current text-to-image methods and the broader body of research in vision-language
understanding still struggle with intricate text prompts that contain many objects
with multiple attributes and relationships. We introduce a new text-to-image
benchmark that contains a suite of fifty tasks and applications that capture a
model’s ability to handle different features of a text prompt. For example, asking a
model to generate a varying number of the same object to measure its ability to
count or providing a text prompt with several objects that each have a different
attribute to correctly identify its ability to match objects and attributes. Rather
than subjectively evaluating text-to-image results on a set of prompts, our new
multi-task benchmark consists of challenge tasks at three difficulty levels (easy,
medium, and hard) along with human ratings for each generated image.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).
1
Introduction
Spurred by large-scale pretraining on billions of image-text pairs, vision-language models have seen
rapid progress in recent years. Large-scale models like CLIP (1) and Flamingo (2) have reported
remarkable performance on dozens of benchmarks using a single model, even when using few or no

…

There has been much recent progress in improving text-to-image models, allowing the synthesis of
objects within novel contexts (6) such as different backgrounds, illumination, and poses. However,
these methods still have challenges generating images in complex scenes or where compositionality
is essential. A critical bottleneck in further progress is the lack of rigorous evaluation protocols, as
current evaluation methods focus on prompts that do not fully account for the diverse settings these
models must support (4).
We propose a new text-to-image generation benchmark covering fifty tasks and applications, each
targeting a different capability of text-to-image generation models as shown in Table 2. For example,
we may ask a model to produce varying numbers of an object to identify its ability to count or ask
a model to generate an image with an object of a specified shape. We divide each task into three
difficulty levels: easy, medium, and hard. For example, suppose the task is to synthesize different
numbers of objects. In that case, the task may be divided into easy: generating 1-3 objects, medium -
generating 4-10 objects, and hard - generating more than ten objects. Next, we provide ten different
instances for each task difficulty level. These instances are specific prompts that implement the tasks.
We score text-to-image models on each of the thirty instances (ten for each of the three difficulty
levels) for each of the fifty tasks and applications. Specifically, we run our benchmark on DALL-E
2 (5) and Stable Diffusion (3).
We can quantify and compare any new text-to-image generation model with our new benchmark.
In this work, we perform a human evaluation of three tasks; however, many of the tasks may also
be evaluated automatically by a neural network. Table 2 describes which tasks may be evaluated
automatically and which require human evaluation. For example, incorporating spatial-aware methods
ensures spatial relationships and prompts with compositional elements that are correctly generated.
Using OCR mechanisms ensures that quoted text is legible and accurate.
Our key contributions are: (i) developing challenge tasks for state-of-the-art text-to-image generative
models, (ii) defining human evaluation procedures and defining which tasks may be automatically
evaluated, and (iii) Performing a human evaluation for a subset of tasks with 3,600 human rat-
ings, comparing the performance of two of the most common open source (Stable Diffusion) and
commercial (DALL-E 2) models.
1.1
Related Work
Text-to-image models may be roughly split into two types: autoregressive transformer-based models
(7) and diffusion-based models (4). Prior state-of-the-art (8; 9; 10; 6) handles specific limitations
of text-to-image models such as generating an image within context or modifying object attributes
automatically. A comprehensive and quantitative multi-task benchmark for text-to-image synthesis
does not exist that covers a diverse set of tasks with varying difficulty levels. Our goal is to develop a
benchmark that will become the gold standard in the field for evaluating text-to-image models that
will endure the test of time.
Text-to-image models are commonly evaluated by the Inception Score (IS) and the Fréchet Inception
Distance (FID). Both of these metrics are based on Inception v3 classifier. These measures, therefore,
are designed for the unconditional setting and are primarily trained on single-object images. We have
seen several approaches which rectify these shortcomings.
Imagen (4) introduced DrawBench, a benchmark with 11 categories with approximately 200 prompts
total. Human raters (25 participants) were asked to choose a better set of generated images from
two models regarding image fidelity and image-text alignment. Categories are: colors counting,
conflicting, DALL-E 2, description, misspellings, positional, rare words, Reddit, text.
1https://www.cosmopolitan.com/lifestyle/a40314356/dall-e-2-artificial-intelligence-cover/
2
Difficulty
Easy
Medium
Hard
Average
Task / Model
SD
DALL-E 2
SD
DALL-E 2
SD
DALL-E 2
SD
DALL-E 2
Counting
74.8
91.8
52.2
51.4
36.1

…

57.3
57.6
56.8
Table 1: Percentages of the best possible scores for human evaluation of Stable Difussion and DALL-
E 2 across the three tasks of counting, shapes, and faces. DALL-E 2 outperforms Stable Diffusion on
Counting and Faces tasks, Stable Diffusion shows minor advantage on the shapes task. On 6 out of 9
sub-tasks DALL-E 2 produces better images.
DALL-E 2-Eval (11) proposed PaintSkills to test skills of the generative models — specified object
generation, counting, color, and spatial relations. It utilizes the Unity engine to test these tasks using
predefined sets of objects, a subset of MS-COCO (12) objects, colors, and spatial relations. We
propose a more comprehensive benchmark of tasks at a finer level of detail, with three levels of
difficulty.
Localized Narratives (13) is a multi-modal image captioning approach that can be adapted to bench-
marking images. Text captions are first generated by human annotators whose cursor movement and
voice commentary hover their cursor over the image to provide richness and accuracy.
PartiPrompts, a holistic benchmark of 1,600 English prompts (14), compared to Localized Narratives,
is better in probing model capabilities on open-domain text-to-image generation. The 1,600 prompts
span 12 different categories and 11 challenge aspects. The 12 categories are artifacts, animals, indoor
scenes, produce and plants, abstract, arts, food & beverage, vehicles, illustrations, outdoor scenes,
people, and world knowledge, while the 11 challenge aspect are basic, fine-grained detail, properties
& positioning, linguistic structures, perspective, quantity, writing & symbols, complex, imagination,
style & format and simple detail. The image quality and the alignment of the generated image with
the input text are evaluated.
2
Methods
We create a comprehensive multi-task text-to-image generation benchmark of fifty diverse tasks and
applications, as shown in Table 2. We use the benchmark to compare different models, comparing
Stable Diffusion (3) 2 and DALLE-2 (5), and identify their limitations. Our evaluation protocol
consists of human ratings between 1 (worst) and 5 (best) of tasks at three difficulty levels.
Examples of cases in which human evaluation is required are: (i) concepts that are difficult to define,
such as successfully combining objects that are rarely co-occurring in the real world; (ii) complex
tasks such as images that require common sense; and (iii) cases where human expertise is essential
such as generating images without racial or gender bias.
We obtained 3,600 human ratings: twenty graduate students, two models, three difficulty levels,
and ten prompts each. The images were all generated with identical default model parameters and
evaluated on the same scale, providing a rating between 1 (worst) and 5 (best).
3
Results
We survey twenty students that evaluate the performance of Stable Diffusion and DALL-E 2. Each
student evaluated the three tasks at three levels of difficulty and ten prompts each, providing a rating
between 1 (worst) and 5 (best). We collected a total of 3,600 scores. The results are summarized
in Table 1 and a detailed breakdown of the evaluations by prompts is available in Table 3 of the
Appendix.
Our human evaluation shows that on the counting task DALL-E 2 (65.7%) performs better than
Stable Diffusion (54.4%), on the Faces tasks both models perform very well and DALL-E 2 (81.7%)
performs better than Stable Diffusion (70.2%), and on the Shapes task both models perform equally
well (56.8% compared to 57.6%).
2Publicly available https://beta.dreamstudio.ai/
3
Id
Task
Eval
1
Generating a specified number of objects
ML
2
Generating objects with specified spatial positioning
ML
3
Combining objects very rarely co-occurring in the world
Human
4
Generating images obeying physical rendering rules of shadows, reflections, and acoustics
Human
5
Generating objects with specified colors
ML
6
Generating conflicting interactions between objects
Human
7
Understanding complex and long text prompts describing objects
Human
8
Understanding misspelled prompts
ML
9
Handling absurd requests
Human
10
Understanding rare words
ML
11
Incorporating quoted text with correct spelling
ML
12
Understanding negation and counter-examples
Human
13
Understanding anaphora and phrases that refer to other parts of the prompt
Human
14
Aligning text as specified in the prompt
ML
15
Generating common-sense images
Human
16
Removing objects without needing manual annotation
ML
17
Removing content that is not child-safe
Human
18
Editing the color of objects without marking them manually
ML
19
Replacing objects without marking them manually
ML
21
Objects obeying physics rules
Human
22
Generating images without racial or gender bias
Human
23
Understanding comparative concepts like fewer and more
ML
24
Photo-realistic faces
ML
25
Understanding prompts regarding weather
Human
26
Handling multi-lingual prompts
ML
27
Duplicating objects perfectly
ML
28
Generating multiple camera viewpoints of the same scene
ML
29
Generating realistic faces with a specific emotion
ML

…

41
Cosmetics: generating realistic images showcasing products
42
Stock photos: generating large amounts of stock images for general audiences
43
Product design: quickly prototyping digital and physical products
44
Illustrations: generating professional artwork for custom purposes
45
Synthetic data: generating synthetic data for boosting training samples size
46
Social media: generating memes and shareable content
47
Image recommendation: generating recommendations based on user preferences
48
Gaming: using natural language to create complex scenes for video games
49
Proteomics: designing new proteins visualizing existing structures
50
Material science: designing new crystals
Table 2: Multi-task text-to-image benchmark and applications: we propose a series of tasks and
applications on which text-to-image models could be evaluated. These tasks can be further divided
based on whether the evaluation can currently be automated or requires human assessment.
4
Performance gracefully degrades as the tasks are more difficult, except for DALL-E 2 which performs
slightly better on the hard than on the medium Shapes task.
Our proposed benchmark allows for testing individual competencies and limitations of the different
generative models. Understanding the limitations is critical for picking the suitable model for each

…

49
47
9
79
90
84
37
51
37
10
41
84
71
68
49
65
Average:
72.70
84.13
61.00
57.23
48.47
62.83
Table 3: Percentages of the best possible scores for human evaluation of Stable Difussion and DALL-
E 2 across the three tasks of counting, shapes, and faces for each of the ten prompts.
6

…

8
9
10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Figure 1: Evaluation of image generation on a counting task at various difficulties. Each panel
contains tasks at different difficulties where the columns correspond to the text prompt and the rows
correspond to the model used to generate the image: (i) Stable Diffusion and (ii) DALLE-2. Images
that are evaluated to sufficiently match the prompt have a green border while images that do not
sufficiently match the prompt have a red border. A success score for both models is indicated in
the upper right corner of each panel. The prompts used to generate the images are classified into
three different difficulties: (i) easy difficulty tasks consisting of generating 1–3 objects, e.g., two cars,
three people; (ii) medium difficulty tasks consisting of generating 4–10 objects, including uncommon
combinations of quantities and objects, e.g., six bowling pins, seven fire hydrants; (iii) hard difficulty
tasks consisting of 10 or more objects with other numerical concepts in the prompt, e.g., twelve boats
arranged in three rows.
7

…

tasks at different difficulties where the columns correspond to the text prompt and the rows correspond
to the model used to generate the image: (i) Stable Diffusion and (ii) DALLE-2. Images that are
evaluated to sufficiently match the prompt have a green border while images that do not sufficiently
match the prompt have a red border. A success score for both models is indicated in the upper right
corner of each panel. The prompts used to generate the images are classified into three different
difficulties: (i) easy difficulty tasks consisting of generating simple shapes, e.g., circle, star; (ii)
medium difficulty tasks consisting of generating entities in the form of a shape, e.g., hexagonal maze,
octagonal TV; (iii) hard difficulty tasks consisting of multiple entities, each of a specified shape, e.g.,
square shaped water bottle next to a semicircular orange.
8

…

1 to 3 features for each individual in a group of 1 to 2 people with easy angle and posture; (iii) hard:
given more than 2 features for each individual in a group of more than 2 people with challenging
angle, posture, lighting or occlusion. Asterisk (∗) indicates a failure to generate an image because of

**default search action**
- Vitali Petsiuk, Alexander E. Siemenn, Saisamrit Surbehera, Zad Chin, Keith Tyser, Gregory Hunter, Arvind Raghavan, Yann Hicke, Bryan A. Plummer, Ori Kerret, Tonio Buonassisi, Kate Saenko, Armando Solar-Lezama, Iddo Drori:
Human Evaluation of Text-to-Image Models on a Multi-Task Benchmark.
CoRR abs/2211.12112 (2022)
**manage site settings**

July 27 - August 1, 2025 ©2025 Association for Computational Linguistics
Automatic Evaluation for Text-to-image Generation: Task-decomposed
Framework, Distilled Training, and Meta-evaluation Benchmark
Rong-Cheng Tu1∗
Zi-Ao Ma1∗
Tian Lan1∗

…

Abstract
Driven by the remarkable progress in diffusion
models, text-to-image generation has achieved
substantial advancements, underscoring the ur-
gent need for robust automatic quality assess-
ment. This task is inherently complex, requir-
ing evaluations that range from object presence
and attribute correctness to relational consis-
tency and visual fidelity. Consequently, current
state-of-the-art MLLM-based approaches often
rely on powerful commercial models such as
GPT-4o, which offer superior reasoning and
instruction-following capabilities but are not
universally accessible. In contrast, while open-
source MLLMs demonstrate promising skills
in vision and language understanding, they un-
derperform in comprehensive image quality as-
sessment. To address these challenges, we pro-
pose a task decomposition evaluation frame-
work based on GPT-4o to automatically con-
struct a specialized training dataset, breaking
down the multifaceted evaluation process into
simpler sub-tasks and thus reducing learning
complexity. Building on this dataset, we de-
sign novel training strategies to distill GPT-4o’s
evaluation capabilities into a 7B open-source
MLLM, MiniCPM-V-2.6, enabling it to better
follow instructions across diverse assessment
criteria. Furthermore, to reliably and compre-
hensively assess prior works and our proposed
model, we manually annotate a meta-evaluation
benchmark that includes chain-of-thought ex-
planations alongside quality scores for gener-
ated images. Experimental results demonstrate
that our distilled open-source MLLM signifi-
cantly outperforms the current state-of-the-art

…

Shuai et al., 2024a). While these models demon-
strate the capability to generate highly creative
visual content, the generated images often suffer
from issues such as distorted appearances of major
entities and incorrect alignment with the input text
prompt (Cao et al., 2024a,b; Wan et al., 2024). Au-
tomatically evaluating these issues can not only pro-
vide effective loss functions for training generative
models to enhance their performance but also filter
out low-quality generated images during inference,
thereby improving user experience (Stiennon et al.,
2022; Nakano et al., 2022). Consequently, there
is an urgent need for precise and automatic evalu-
ation methods to assess the quality and fidelity of
generated images (Ku et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2023).
To meet this need, early works like CLIP-based
and BLIP-based scoring methods (Radford et al.,
2021) have been used to evaluate the semantic
alignment between input text and generated images,

…

has promoted researchers to develop MLLM-based
automatic evaluation methods. These methods typ-
ically employ simple prompts, asking MLLMs to
directly assess the quality of generated images by
implicitly completing multiple complex judgment
tasks.
However, the evaluation task is inherently com-
plex, requiring assessments that range from object
22340

…

generated images. We argue that by decomposing
the complex evaluation task into a series of sim-
pler or fine-grained sub-tasks, open-source models
can progressively complete them and accurately
evaluate the qualities of generated images.
To
this
end,
we
propose
a
novel
task-
decomposed evaluation framework based on GPT-
4o to automatically construct a training dataset to
optimize open-source MLLMs for better evalua-
tion performance. Specifically, this framework first
adopts GPT-4o to extract entities and their intrinsic
properties, and relational attributes from the input
text prompt. These extracted details are used to

…

evaluation dimension, we aggregate all predicted
results for the questions to provide corresponding
explanations and score the dimension’s quality. Fi-
nally, by considering all evaluated dimensions, the
framework delivers an overall judgment.
Based on the training dataset automatically cu-
rated through the aforementioned framework, we
propose a novel and practical paradigm to fine-
tune the 7B open-source MLLM, MiniCPM-V-2.6,
into an efficient automatic evaluation model. Ad-
ditionally, to comprehensively and reliably evalu-
ate the performance of existing baselines and our
fine-tuned model, we manually annotate a meta-
evaluation benchmark, which also evaluates the

…

first decompose the text prompt into simple ques-
tions using LLMs, and then evaluate the quality of
generated images by computing the accuracy of the
‘yes/no’ answers of these questions.
Recently, there is an emerging trend to leverage
the reasoning capabilities of MLLMs (Tu et al.,
2025a,b; Ma et al., 2024; Dong et al., 2024; Hu
et al., 2024) to directly assess the alignment be-
tween generated images and input text, exhibiting
22341

…

fer an alternative, their limited capabilities hinder
effective image quality evaluation. This limitation
primarily arises from the coarse-grained and un-
clear prompts used in existing methods, making it
challenging for open-source MLLMs to accurately
interpret and assess generated content.
3
Approaches
In evaluating text-to-image task, two primary chal-

…

sequential sub-tasks: (1) Evaluation Content Ex-
traction; (2) Caption and Answer Generation; and
(3) Explanation and Scoring.
3.1
Task Decomposition Evaluation
Framework
Evaluation Content Extraction (ECE)
As
shown in Step 1 of Figure 1, we leverage GPT-
4o (Achiam et al., 2023) to systematically extract
1Please refer to Appendix C for more error patterns of
existing open-source MLLMs.
22342

…

evaluated image.
In summary, we decompose the text-to-image
evaluation task into three fine-grained sub-tasks,
significantly reducing its complexity. Therefore,
the training dataset constructed with this frame-
work will be easy for the open-source MLLMs to
learn from, effectively enhancing their image qual-

…

previous works (Ku et al., 2023) due to the multi-
ple question-answers and detailed explanations. It
introduces challenges for optimization, as critical
information may become obscured within lengthy
sequences. Second, the dataset suffers from distri-
bution imbalances, primarily in sub-task distribu-
tion imbalance and score distribution imbalance,
which will affect the effectiveness of training.
22343

…

ing the evaluation performance of the fine-tuned
model (Lan et al., 2020).
3.2.1
Fine-grained Sub-tasks Training
Strategy
In practical, we formulate a training sample into
six fine-grained sub-task samples. We present an
illustration in Figure 4. Each one is formatted into

…

A, three kinds of questions (QA, QI, QR) and de-
tailed caption C by optimizing this loss function:
L1 = MLLM(E, A, (QA, QI, QR), C|T , I)
(1)
Individual Answer Generation ( 2⃝)
aims to
fine-tune MLLMs for predicting the detailed an-
swers for questions given the evaluated image I.
During experiments, it is challenging for open-
source MLLMs to directly generate answers for all
questions due to their limited capabiilties. Consid-
ering that answers to each question are independent,
we simplify the optimization by training MLLMs
to predict the answer for each question individually,
and optimize the following loss function:
L2 =
N
�
i=1
MLLM(Ansi|I, Qi)
(2)
where Qi, Ansi denotes the i-th pair of question
and answer, and N is the sum of the numbers of the

…

ately influences this training process when they are
jointly optimized, resulting in insufficient learn-
ing for score prediction, thus compromising the
model’s scoring accuracy. To address this problem,
we further separate the learning of explanation and
scoring into two fine-grained sub-tasks. Specifi-
cally, we first optimize the explanation generation:

…

(4)
Summarization ( 5⃝and
6⃝)
As shown in Fig-
ure 4, we finally train open-source MLLMs to sum-
marize a final explanation rationale across three
evaluation dimensions: visual appearance quality,
accuracy of entities and attributes, as well as the
relationship alignment.
L5 = MLLM(Expsum.|{Expi, Si}N
i=1)
(5)
Then, the overall judgment score is predicted:
L6 = MLLM(Ssum.|{Expi, Si}N
i=1, Expsum.)
(6)
During training, samples of these sub-tasks are
randomly collected to optimize their correspond-
ing loss functions. It is important to note that our
22344

…

performance limitations of open-source MLLMs.
3.2.2
Data Rebalance Training Strategy
We propose two rebalance strategies to reduce the
effects of the imbalanced data distribution prob-
lems. (1) Sub-task Rebalance: In our dataset,
there are multiple questions associated with each
sample, resulting in a significantly higher number
of answers and explanations compared to extrac-
tions and summarizations. To rectify this imbal-
ance, we maintain the existing number of answers
and explanations, while increasing the volume of
extraction and summarization samples by augment-
ing them through repetition. (2) Score Distribu-
tion Rebalance: A notable issue in our constructed

…

source MLLMs to be more inclined to assign higher
scores to the images. To solve this problem, we
duplicate and re-sample the training samples that
are underrepresented, ensuring an equal number of
samples across each score range from 0 to 10.
4
Training Set and Human-Annotated

…

to obtain detailed evaluations, following our pro-
posed framework described in Section 3.1.
4.2
Human-annotated Meta-evaluation
To the best of our knowledge, there is currently
no fine-grained, score-based benchmark that com-
prehensively and reliably evaluates the capability
of existing models in assessing text-to-image gen-
eration.3 To address this gap, in addition to con-
structing the training set, we have developed a high-
quality meta-evaluation benchmark through human
annotations. Specifically, three human annotators
are asked to annotate the evaluations for each pair
of text prompt and image, following our proposed
task decomposition evaluation framework. The
annotated judgment scores provide the basis for ob-
jective evaluation, helping to assess the correlation
between model outputs and human judgments. Fur-
thermore, the annotated textual explanations serve
as reference explanations for reliable automatic
subjective evaluation (Lan et al., 2024b), which
helps assess the accuracy of the models. More de-