# Source: https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.08652
# Author: Jemin Hwangbo et al.
# Title: [1901.08652] Learning agile and dynamic motor skills for legged robots
# Fetched via: search
# Date: 2026-04-09

# Computer Science > Robotics
...
[Submitted on 24 Jan 2019]
…
Abstract:Legged robots pose one of the greatest challenges in robotics.
Dynamic and agile maneuvers of animals cannot be imitated by existing methods that are crafted by humans.
A compelling alternative is reinforcement learning, which requires minimal craftsmanship and promotes the natural evolution of a control policy.
However, so far, reinforcement learning research for legged robots is mainly limited to simulation, and only few and comparably simple examples have been deployed on real systems.
The primary reason is that training with real robots, particularly with dynamically balancing systems, is complicated and expensive.
In the present work, we introduce a method for training a neural network policy in simulation and transferring it to a state-of-the-art legged system, thereby leveraging fast, automated, and cost-effective data generation schemes.
The approach is applied to the ANYmal robot, a sophisticated medium-dog-sized quadrupedal system.
Using policies trained in simulation, the quadrupedal machine achieves locomotion skills that go beyond what had been achieved with prior methods: ANYmal is capable of precisely and energy-efficiently following high-level body velocity commands, running faster than before, and recovering from falling even in complex configurations.
|Subjects:|Robotics (cs.RO); Machine Learning (cs.LG); Machine Learning (stat.ML)|
|--|--|
|Cite as:|arXiv:1901.08652 [cs.RO]|
| |(or arXiv:1901.08652v1 [cs.RO] for this version)|
| |https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1901.08652 arXiv-issued DOI via DataCite|
|Journal reference:|Science Robotics 4.26 (2019): eaau5872|
|Related DOI:|https://doi.org/10.1126/scirobotics.aau5872 DOI(s) linking to related resources|

# Learning Agile and Dynamic Motor Skills for Legged Robots

###### Abstract

Legged robots pose one of the greatest challenges in robotics. Dynamic and agile maneuvers of animals cannot be imitated by existing methods that are crafted by humans. A compelling alternative is reinforcement learning, which requires minimal craftsmanship and promotes the natural evolution of a control policy. However, so far, reinforcement learning research for legged robots is mainly limited to simulation, and only few and comparably simple examples have been deployed on real systems.
The primary reason is that training with real robots, particularly with dynamically balancing systems, is complicated and expensive. In the present work, we report a new method for training a neural network policy in simulation and transferring it to a state-of-the-art legged system, thereby we leverage fast, automated, and cost-effective data generation schemes.
The approach is applied to the ANYmal robot, a sophisticated medium-dog-sized quadrupedal system. Using policies trained in simulation, the quadrupedal machine achieves locomotion skills that go beyond what had been achieved with prior methods: ANYmal is capable of precisely and energy-efficiently following high-level body velocity commands, running faster than ever before, and recovering from falling even in complex configurations.

…

Designing control algorithms for these hardware platforms remains exceptionally challenging. From the control perspective, these robots are high-dimensional and non-smooth systems with many physical constraints. The contact points change over the course of time and depending on the maneuver being executed and, therefore, cannot be prespecified. Analytical models of the robots are often inaccurate and cause uncertainties in the dynamics. A complex sensor suite and multiple layers of software bring noise and delays to information transfer. Conventional control theories are often insufficient to deal with these problems effectively. Specialized control methods developed to tackle this complex problem typically require a lengthy design process and arduous parameter tuning.
The most popular approach to controlling physical legged systems is modular controller design. This method breaks the control problem down into smaller submodules that are largely decoupled and are therefore easier to manage. Each module is based on template dynamics [6] or heuristics and generates reference values for the next module. For example, some popular approaches [7, 8, 9, 10] use a template-dynamics-based control module that approximates the robot as a point mass with a massless limb to compute the next foothold position.

…

More recently, trajectory optimization approaches have been proposed to mitigate the aforementioned problems. In these methods, the controller is separated into two modules: planning and tracking. The planning module uses rigid-body dynamics and numerical optimization to compute an optimal path that the robot should follow to reach the desired goal. The tracking module is then used to follow the path.
In general, trajectory optimization for a complex rigid-body model with many unspecified contact points is beyond the capabilities of current optimization techniques. Therefore, in practice, a series of approximations are employed to reduce complexity. Some methods approximate the contact dynamics to be smooth [13, 14], making the dynamics differentiable. Notably, Neunert et al. [13] demonstrated that such methods can be used to control a physical quadrupedal robot.
Other methods [15] prespecify the contact timings and solve for sections of trajectories where the dynamics remain smooth. A few methods aim to solve this problem with little to no approximation [16, 17]. These methods can discover a gait pattern (i.e., contact sequence) with hard contact models and have demonstrated automatic motion generation for 2D robotic systems but, like any other trajectory optimization approach, the possible contact points are specified a priori.

…

Data-driven methods, like reinforcement learning (RL), promise to overcome the limitations of prior model-based approaches by learning effective controllers directly from experience. The idea of RL is to collect data by trial and error and automatically tune the controller to optimize the given cost (or reward) function representing the task. This process is fully automated and can optimize the controller end-to-end, from sensor readings to low-level control signals, thereby allowing for highly agile and efficient controllers.

…

In this work, we develop a practical methodology for autonomously learning and transferring agile and dynamic motor skills for complex and large legged systems, such as the ANYmal robot [5]. Compared to the robots used in [35], ANYmal has a much larger leg length relative to footprint, making it more dynamic, less statically stable, and therefore more difficult to control.

…

Our approach is summarized in Fig. 1. Our key insight on the simulation side is that efficiency and realism can be achieved by combining classical models representing well-known articulated system and contact dynamics with learning methods that can handle complex actuation (Fig. 1, steps 1 and 2). The rigid links of ANYmal, connected through high-quality ball bearings, closely resemble an idealized multi-body system that can be modeled with well-known physical principles [40].

…

Thanks to efficient software implementations, we did not need any special computing hardware, such as multi-CPU or multi-GPU servers, for training. All training sessions presented in this paper were done on a personal computer with one CPU and one GPU, and none lasted more than eleven hours.

We use the hybrid simulator for training controllers via reinforcement learning (Fig. 1, step 3). The controller is represented by a multi-layer perceptron that takes as input the history of the robot’s states and produces as output the joint position target. Specifying different reward functions for RL yields controllers for different tasks of interest.

…

We apply the presented methodology to learning several complex motor skills that are deployed on the physical quadruped. First, the controller enables the ANYmal robot to follow base velocity commands more accurately and energy-efficiently than the best previously existing controller running on the same hardware. Second, the controller makes the robot run faster than ever before, breaking the previous speed record of ANYmal by 25 %.
The controller can operate at the limits of the hardware and push performance to the maximum. Third, we learn a controller for dynamic recovery from a fall. This maneuver is exceptionally challenging for existing methods, since it involves multiple unspecified internal and external contacts. It requires fine coordination of actions across all limbs and must use momentum to dynamically flip the robot.

…

### Command-conditioned locomotion

In most practical scenarios, the motion of a robot is guided by high-level navigation commands, such as the desired direction and speed of motion. These commands can be provided for instance by an upper-level planning algorithm or by a user via teleoperation. Using our method, we trained a locomotion policy that can follow such commands at runtime, adapting the gait as needed, with no prior knowledge of command sequence and timing. A command consists of three components: forward velocity, lateral velocity, and yaw rate.

…

Next, we quantitatively evaluate this learned locomotion policy by driving the robot with randomly-sampled commands. The commands are sampled as described in section S2. The robot receives a new command every two seconds and the command is held constant in between. The test is performed for 30 seconds and a total of 15 random transitions are performed, including the initial transition from zero velocity. The base velocity plot is shown in fig. S1. The average linear velocity error was 0.143 m/s and the average yaw rate error was 0.174 rad/s.

…

The control performance was also evaluated and compared in forward running. To this end, we sent a step input of four different speed commands (0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and 1.0 m/s) for 4.5 s each. The results, including a comparison to the prior method [12], are shown in Fig.

…

Figure 2B shows the velocity tracking accuracy of the policy both in simulation and on the real robot. Note that the oscillation of the observed velocity around the commanded one is a well-known phenomenon in legged systems, including humans [43]. In terms of average velocity, the learned policy has an error of 2.2 % on the real robot, 1.1 % higher than in a simulation.

…

First, we compare the velocity error at various commanded velocities in Fig. 2C. The learned controller is more accurate than the prior controller for all commanded velocities: by a factor of 1.5 to 2.5 compared to the dynamic lateral walk and by a factor of 5 to 7 compared to the flying trot, depending on the speed.

…

The learned controller is significantly more efficient in this respect than both prior gaits, using 23 % to 36 % less torque depending on the velocity. This large improvement in efficiency is possible since the learned controller walks with 10 to 15 degree straighter nominal knee posture. The nominal posture cannot be adjusted to this level in the approach of Bellicoso et al. since this would drastically increase the rate of failure (falling).
Next, we compare our method to ablated alternatives: training with an ideal actuator model and training with an analytical actuator model. The ideal actuator model assumes that all controllers and hardware inside the actuator have infinite bandwidth and zero latency. The analytical model uses the actual controller code running on the actuator in conjunction with identified dynamics parameters from experiments and Computer-Aided Design (CAD) tools. Some parameters, such as latency, damping, and friction are hand-tuned to increase the accuracy of predicted torque in relation to data obtained from experiments. The policy training procedure for each method is identical to ours.

…

We have used the presented methodology to train a high-speed locomotion controller. This controller was tested on the physical system by slowly increasing the commanded velocity to 1.6 m/s and lowering it to zero after 10 meters. The forward speed and joint velocities/torques are shown in Fig. 3. ANYmal reached 1.58 m/s in simulation and 1.5 m/s on the physical system when the command was set to 1.6 m/s.
All speed values were computed by averaging over at least 3 gait cycles. The controller used both the maximum torque (40 Nm) and the maximum joint velocities (12 rad/s) on the physical system as shown in Fig. 3B and 3C. This shows that the learned policy can exploit the full capacity of the hardware to achieve the goal.

…

Fast and flexible recovery after a fall, as seen in animals, requires dynamic motion with multiple unspecified contact points. The collision model for our quadruped is highly complicated: it consists of 41 collision bodies, such as boxes, cylinders, and spheres (Fig. 1, step 1). Planning a feasible trajectory for such a model is extremely complicated. Even simulating such a system is challenging since there are many internal contacts. We use the approach of Hwangbo et al. [41] due to its ability to handle such simulation in numerically stable fashion.
Using the presented methodology, we trained a recovery policy and tested it on the real robot. We place ANYmal in nine random configurations and activate the controller as shown in movie S7. Many challenging configurations are tested, including a nearly entirely upside-down configuration (pose 8) and more complex contact scenarios where ANYmal is resting on its own legs (pose 2 and 4). In all tests, ANYmal successfully flipped itself upright. An example motion is shown in Fig. 4. These agile and dynamic behaviors demonstrate that our approach is able to learn performant controllers for tasks that are difficult or impossible to address with prior methods.

## Discussion

The learning-based control approach presented in this paper achieved a new level of locomotion skill based purely on training in simulation and without tedious tuning on the physical robot. The system achieved more precise and energy-efficient motions than the prior state of the art. It outperformed the previous speed record by 25 % and learned to consistently restore the robot to an operational configuration by dynamically rolling over its body.
Existing controllers are created by engineers. A model with adequate complexity has to be designed and a control strategy has to be developed, tested, and tuned. This process typically takes months and has to be repeated for every distinct maneuver. In contrast, the simulation and learning framework used in this work are applicable to any rigid body system. For applications to new tasks, our method only requires a task description, which consists of the cost function, the initial state distribution, and randomization.
In our method, learned actuator dynamics significantly reduce the reality gap, while stochastic modeling guides the policy to be sufficiently conservative. The recovery task was successful on the very first attempt on the hardware. We then further improved the success rate to 100 % by relaxing the joint velocity constraints. The results presented here were obtained on the second day of experiments on the physical system.

…

## Method

This section describes in detail the simulation environment, the training process, and the deployment on the physical system. An overview of our training method is shown in Fig. 5. The training loop proceeds as follows. The rigid-body simulator outputs the next state of the robot given the joint torques and the current state. The joint velocity and the position error are buffered in a joint state history within a finite time window.

…

### Modeling rigid-body dynamics

To efficiently train a complex policy within a reasonable time and transfer it to the real world, we need a simulation platform that is both fast and accurate. One of the biggest challenges with walking robots is the dynamics at intermittent contacts. To this end, we utilize the rigid body contact solver presented in our previous work [41].
This contact solver employs a hard contact model that fully respects the Coulomb friction cone constraint. This modeling technique can accurately capture the true dynamics of a set of rigid bodies making hard contacts with their environment. The solver is not only accurate but also fast, generating about 900,000 time steps per second for the simulated quadruped on an ordinary desktop machine. Because we need hundreds of millions of samples to train a complicated policy, this solver was key to our work.

…

To this end, we use supervised learning to obtain an action-to-torque relationship that includes all software and hardware dynamics within one control loop. More precisely, we train an actuator network that outputs an estimated torque at the joints given a history of position errors (the actual position subtracted from the commanded position) and velocities.

…

The states of the actuators are only partially observable because the internal states of the actuators (e.g., states of the internal controllers and motor velocity) cannot be measured directly. We assume that the network can be trained to estimate the internal states given a history of position errors and velocities, since otherwise the given information is simply insufficient to control the robot adequately.
The actuator used in this work is revolute and radially symmetric, and the absolute angular position is irrelevant given the position error. We use a history consisting of the current state and two past states that correspond to and seconds. Note that too sparse input configuration might not effectively capture the dynamics at high frequency (). This issue is partially mitigated by introducing a smoothness cost term, which penalizes abrupt changes in the output of the policy.

…

To train the network, we collected a dataset consisting of joint position errors, joint velocities, and the torque. We used a simple parameterized controller that generates foot trajectories in the form of a sine wave; the corresponding joint positions were computed using inverse kinematics. The feet constantly made or break a contact with the ground during data collection so that the resulting trajectories roughly mimicked the trajectories followed by a locomotion controller.
To obtain a rich set of data, we varied the amplitude (510 cm) and the frequency (125 Hz) of the foot trajectories and disturbed the robot manually during data collection. We found that the excitation must cover a wide range of frequency spectra since, otherwise, the trained model generates unnatural oscillation even during the training phase.

…

### Reinforcement learning

We represent the control problem in discretized time. At every time step the agent obtains an observation , performs an action , and achieves a scalar reward . We refer to reward and cost interchangeably, with cost being the negative of the reward. We denote by the tuple of recent observations. The agent selects actions according to a stochastic policy , which is a distribution over actions conditioned on the recent observations. The aim is to find a policy that maximizes the discounted sum of rewards over an infinite horizon:
|(1)|
|--|
where is the discount factor and is the trajectory distribution under policy (the distribution depends both on the policy and the environment dynamics). In our setting, the observations are the measurements of robot states provided to the controller, the actions are the position commands to the actuators, and the rewards are specified so as to induce the behavior of interest.
A variety of reinforcement learning algorithms can be applied to the specified policy optimization problem. We chose Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) [22], a policy gradient algorithm that has been demonstrated to learn locomotion policies in simulation [54]. It requires almost no parameter tuning; we use only the default parameters (as provided in [22, 54]) for all learning sessions presented in this paper.
We used a fast custom implementation of the algorithm [55]. This efficient implementation and fast rigid-body simulation [41] allowed us to generate and process about a quarter of a billion state transitions in roughly four hours. A learning session terminates if the average performance of the policy does not improve by more than a task-specific threshold within 300 TRPO iterations.

### Observation and action

The observations in our method should be observable (i.e., can be inferred from measurements) on the real robot and relevant for the task. The joint angles, velocities, and body twist are all observable and highly relevant. Measuring the body orientation is not straightforward since only two degrees of freedom in the orientation are observable with an Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU).

…

The position gain is chosen to be roughly the nominal range of torque (30 Nm) divided by the nominal range of motion (0.6 rad). This ensures that the policy network has similar output range for torque and position. The velocity gain is chosen to be sufficiently high to prevent unwanted oscillation on the real robot. From our experience, the final locomotion performance is robust against a small change in gains. For instance, increasing the position gain to 80 Nm/rad does not noticeably change the performance.

…

We solved this problem by introducing a curriculum: using a curriculum, we shape the initial cost landscape such that the policy is strongly attracted to a locomotion policy and then later polish the motion to satisfy the other criteria. A simple curriculum was generated by modulating the coefficients of the cost terms and the disturbance via a multiplicative curriculum factor.
We define a curriculum factor which describes the progression of the curriculum: corresponds to the start of the curriculum and corresponds to the final difficulty level. The intermediate values are computed as , where is the advance rate, which describes how quickly the final difficulty level is reached, and is the iteration index of RL training. The sequence of curriculum factors is monotonically increasing and asymptotically converging to 1 within the given parameter intervals.

…

The initial state of the robot is sampled either from a previous trajectory or a random distribution, shown in table S3, with equal probability. This initialization procedure generates data containing complicated state transitions and robustifies the trained controller. Each trajectory lasts 6 seconds unless the robot reaches a terminal state earlier. There are two possibilities for termination: violating joint limits and hitting the ground with the base.

…

For training recovery from a fall, the collision bodies of the ANYmal model are randomized in size and position. Samples that result in unrealistic internal collisions are removed. The cost function and the initial state distribution are described in section S4 and fig. S3, respectively. The special initialization method in section S4 is needed to train for this task since naive sampling often results in interpenetration and the dynamics become unrealistic. To this end, we dropped ANYmal from a height of 1.0 m with randomized orientations and joint positions, ran the simulation for 1.2 s, and used the resulting state as initialization.

Abstract
Legged robots pose one of the greatest challenges in robotics.
Dynamic and agile maneuvers of animals cannot be imitated by existing methods that are crafted by humans.
A compelling alternative is reinforcement learning, which requires minimal craftsmanship and promotes the natural evolution of a control policy.
However, so far, reinforcement learning research for legged robots is mainly limited to simulation, and only few and comparably simple examples have been deployed on real systems.
The primary reason is that training with real robots, particularly with dynamically balancing systems, is complicated and expensive.
In the present work, we introduce a method for training a neural network policy in simulation and transferring it to a state-of-the-art legged system, thereby leveraging fast, automated, and cost-effective data generation schemes.
The approach is applied to the ANYmal robot, a sophisticated medium-dog–sized quadrupedal system.
Using policies trained in simulation, the quadrupedal machine achieves locomotion skills that go beyond what had been achieved with prior methods: ANYmal is capable of precisely and energy-efficiently following high-level body velocity commands, running faster than before, and recovering from falling even in complex configurations.
Supplementary Material
Summary
Section S1.
Nomenclature
Section S2.
Random command sampling method used for evaluating the learned command-conditioned controller
Section S3.
Cost terms for training command-conditioned locomotion and high-speed locomotion tasks
Section S4.
Cost terms for training recovery from a fall
Fig. S1.
Base velocity tracking performance of the learned controller while following random commands.
Fig. S2.
Base velocity tracking performance of the best existing method while following random commands.
Fig. S3.
...
Locomotion policy trained with a learned actuator model.
Movie S2.
Random command experiment.
...
Movie S4.
...
Movie S5.
Performance of a learned high-speed policy.

Learning agile and dynamic motor skills for legged robots.
Hwangbo, J., Lee, J., Dosovitskiy, A., Bellicoso, C. D., Tsounis, V., Koltun, V., & Hutter, M. *Science Robotics*, Science Robotics, 2019.
Paper Video doi abstract bibtex
Legged robots pose one of the greatest challenges in robotics.
Dynamic and agile maneuvers of animals cannot be imitated by existing methods that are crafted by humans.
A compelling alternative is reinforcement learning, which requires minimal craftsmanship and promotes the natural evolution of a control policy.
However, so far, reinforcement learning research for legged robots is mainly limited to simulation, and only few and comparably simple examples have been deployed on real systems.
The primary reason is that training with real robots, particularly with dynamically balancing systems, is complicated and expensive.
In the present work, we introduce a method for training a neural network policy in simulation and transferring it to a state-of-the-art legged system, thereby leveraging fast, automated, and cost-effective data generation schemes.
The approach is applied to the ANYmal robot, a sophisticated medium-dog–sized quadrupedal system.
Using policies trained in simulation, the quadrupedal machine achieves locomotion skills that go beyond what had been achieved with prior methods: ANYmal is capable of precisely and energy-efficiently following high-level body velocity commands, running faster than before, and recovering from falling even in complex configurations.
```
@article {hwangbo2019learning,
author = {Hwangbo, Jemin and Lee, Joonho and Dosovitskiy, Alexey and Bellicoso, C. Dario and Tsounis, Vassilios and Koltun, Vladlen and Hutter, Marco},
title = {Learning agile and dynamic motor skills for legged robots},
volume = {4},
number = {26},
elocation-id = {eaau5872},
year = {2019},
doi = {10.1126/scirobotics.aau5872},
publisher = {Science Robotics},
abstract = {
Legged robots pose one of the greatest challenges in robotics.
Dynamic and agile maneuvers of animals cannot be imitated by existing methods that are crafted by humans.
A compelling alternative is reinforcement learning, which requires minimal craftsmanship and promotes the natural evolution of a control policy.
However, so far, reinforcement learning research for legged robots is mainly limited to simulation, and only few and comparably simple examples have been deployed on real systems.
The primary reason is that training with real robots, particularly with dynamically balancing systems, is complicated and expensive.
In the present work, we introduce a method for training a neural network policy in simulation and transferring it to a state-of-the-art legged system, thereby leveraging fast, automated, and cost-effective data generation schemes.
The approach is applied to the ANYmal robot, a sophisticated medium-dog{\textendash}sized quadrupedal system.
Using policies trained in simulation, the quadrupedal machine achieves locomotion skills that go beyond what had been achieved with prior methods: ANYmal is capable of precisely and energy-efficiently following high-level body velocity commands, running faster than before, and recovering from falling even in complex configurations.
},
URL = {http://robotics.sciencemag.org/content/4/26/eaau5872},
eprint = {http://robotics.sciencemag.org/content/4/26/eaau5872.full.pdf},
journal = {Science Robotics},
url_video = {https://youtu.be/aTDkYFZFWug},
}
```

# Learning agile and dynamic motor skills for legged robots
Sci Robot.
2019 Jan 16;4(26):eaau5872.
doi: 10.1126/scirobotics.aau5872.
### Authors
Jemin Hwangbo^ 1 ^, Joonho Lee^ 2 ^, Alexey Dosovitskiy^ 3 ^, Dario Bellicoso^ 2 ^, Vassilios Tsounis^ 2 ^, Vladlen Koltun^ 4 ^, Marco Hutter^ 2 ^
…
## Abstract
Legged robots pose one of the greatest challenges in robotics.
Dynamic and agile maneuvers of animals cannot be imitated by existing methods that are crafted by humans.
A compelling alternative is reinforcement learning, which requires minimal craftsmanship and promotes the natural evolution of a control policy.
However, so far, reinforcement learning research for legged robots is mainly limited to simulation, and only few and comparably simple examples have been deployed on real systems.
The primary reason is that training with real robots, particularly with dynamically balancing systems, is complicated and expensive.
In the present work, we introduce a method for training a neural network policy in simulation and transferring it to a state-of-the-art legged system, thereby leveraging fast, automated, and cost-effective data generation schemes.
The approach is applied to the ANYmal robot, a sophisticated medium-dog-sized quadrupedal system.
Using policies trained in simulation, the quadrupedal machine achieves locomotion skills that go beyond what had been achieved with prior methods: ANYmal is capable of precisely and energy-efficiently following high-level body velocity commands, running faster than before, and recovering from falling even in complex configurations.
Copyright © 2019 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science.