# Source: https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.769.pdf
# Title: Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 14255–14273
# Fetched via: jina
# Date: 2026-04-09

Title: 2024.acl-long.769.pdf



Number of Pages: 19

> Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 14255–14273 August 11-16, 2024 ©2024 Association for Computational Linguistics

# Superfiltering: Weak-to-Strong Data Filtering for Fast Instruction-Tuning 

## Ming Li 1, Yong Zhang 2, Shwai He 1, Zhitao Li 2, Hongyu Zhao 1,Jianzong Wang 2, Ning Cheng 2, Tianyi Zhou 1* 1University of Maryland 2Ping An Technology (Shenzhen) Co., Ltd. minglii@umd.edu, jzwang@188.com, tianyi@umd.edu Project: https://github.com/tianyi-lab/Superfiltering 

## Abstract 

Instruction tuning is critical to improve LLMs but usually suffers from low-quality and redun-dant data. Data filtering for instruction tuning has proved important in improving both the efficiency and performance of the tuning pro-cess. But it also leads to extra cost and com-putation due to the involvement of LLMs in this process. To reduce the filtering cost, we study Superfiltering : Can we use a smaller and weaker model to select data for finetun-ing a larger and stronger model? Despite the performance gap between weak and strong lan-guage models, we find their highly consistent capability to perceive instruction difficulty and data selection results. This enables us to use a much smaller and more efficient model to filter the instruction data used to train a larger lan-guage model. Not only does it largely speed up the data filtering, but the filtered-data-finetuned LLM achieves even better performance on stan-dard benchmarks. Extensive experiments vali-date the efficacy and efficiency of our approach. 

## 1 Introduction 

Earlier works of instruction tuning on Large Lan-guage Models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Ope-nAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023a; Jiang et al., 2023) focus on creating large, varied, and high-quality datasets of various tasks with responses curated by human experts (Khashabi et al., 2020; Ye et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022; Du et al., 2022), which can be bottlenecked by the inten-sive human labor. An alternative is to generate the data by a powerful teacher LLM (Wang et al., 2023b; Taori et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023a, 2024b,a; Xu et al., 2024) but the quality is hard to control and largely depends on the teacher. LIMA (Zhou et al., 2023) finds that a mere 1,000 human-crafted high-quality data could significantly 

> *Corresponding author

Figure 1: Top: Comparison of data filtering for instruc-tion tuning of a student model. (a) The filter model is a strong proprietary LLM, e.g. ChatGPT, which can be time-consuming and expensive but usually performs promisingly. (b) The filter model is the student model itself or a similar-sized open-source LLM, which is still time-consuming but free to use. (c) Weak-to-strong superfiltering proposed by this paper, which utilizes a much smaller filter model, e.g. GPT-2, to train a stronger student LLM. We find it costs much less time but maintains the performance. Bottom: Comparisons of two student models finetuned using 5% data selected by LLaMA2-7B and GPT-2 from the Alpaca dataset. (d) 

Both models trained on 5% data outperform the baseline model trained on 100% data. (e) GPT-2 as the superfilter speeds up data filtering by ∼ 20 times. 

improve an LLM’s instruction-following capability, based on which they posit that LLMs acquire most knowledge during the pretraining and thus a few data suffices for instruction tuning. To further free the human labor in data curation and accelerate the instruction tuning process, a line of recent works apply an extra filter algorithm to select data from the existing dataset. However, the model used in the filtering process usually needs to be as powerful as ChatGPT (Chen et al., 2023b; Lu 

14255 et al., 2023) or requires additional reward data train-ing (Du et al., 2023; Bukharin and Zhao, 2023), or is the student model itself (Li et al., 2023b, 2024b), which leads to additional expensive cost and la-tency due to the inference on these large filter mod-els, especially when the original dataset is large while only a tiny fraction of data needs to be se-lected. These paradigms are presented in Figure 1 (a) and (b). To reduce the filtering cost, we study 

Superfiltering : Can we use a smaller and weaker model as a filter to select instruction-tuning data for training a larger and stronger model? This was first studied for training small classification models by Coleman et al. (2020) while the effec-tiveness on the open-domain instruction dataset is un-explored. Recently, Weak-to-Strong General-ization (Burns et al., 2023) proposes to utilize a weaker ChatGPT to generate data used to finetune a stronger GPT4 model, which shares a similar spirit with our Superfiltering as depicted in Figure 1(c). In Superfitering, we find that a smaller and weaker GPT-2 (124M) (Radford et al., 2019) suf-fices to replace previously used large filter mod-els and select high-quality instruction tuning data used to finetune a much larger LLaMA2 (7B or 13B). This is motivated by our main discovery of filter models’ consistency on two data statistical metrics, perplexity and instruction-following dif-ficulty (IFD) score (Li et al., 2023b). Despite the differences in scales across different filter mod-els, their rankings of the same instruction tuning dataset are surprisingly consistent, as demonstrated by the large rank correlation coefficients evaluated on different models and datasets. Our thorough em-pirical study implies that weaker language models possess a capability consistent with their stronger counterparts in comprehending and discerning the difficulty of diverse instructions, though they may differ in other skills like reasoning and generaliza-tion. In extensive experiments, our Superfiltering strat-egy using GPT-2 as the filter, as exemplified on several widely used instruction datasets, brings sig-nificant speedups to data filtering for instruction tuning. By utilizing only 5% of the original data volume, Superfilter allows us to attain LLMs com-parable, and in some instances superior, to those achieved by training with full data. Our main con-tributions can be summarized in three folds: • Weak-to-Strong Consistency on Data Filter- 

> Figure 2: Pairwise comparison between each model finetuned using Superfiltered data (5%, 10%, and 15% of the original dataset) and the full-data (100%) finetuned model. We report results for two base models (LLaMA2-7B/13B) and two datasets (Alpaca and Alpaca-GPT4 datasets). The win-tie-lose is judged by GPT-4 given two models’ responses to each instruction from WizardLM test set.

ing : We reveal the strong consistency between small and large LLMs in perceiving and evalu-ating the difficulty of instruction tuning data. • Efficent Superfiltering Strategy : We propose the first method of Superfiltering that utilizes a small LM, e.g., GPT-2 (124M), to select data for instruction tuning, and brings significant speedups to LLM finetuning pipeline. • Efficacy of Selected Training Data : Superfilter-ing is precise in allocating high-quality and infor-mative data improving LLM instruction tuning. 

## 2 Problem Formulation 

2.1 Preliminaries 

We define a dataset as D, containing n triplets x =(Instruction, [Input ], Response ) as the instruc-tion tuning data samples. Earlier instructing tun-ing samples mostly contain separated instruction 

and input segments of better controls (Wang et al., 2022; Longpre et al., 2023b; Taori et al., 2023), while most of the current datasets directly merge the inputs to instructions (Zhou et al., 14256 2023; Chiang et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023a). For simplicity, we define x =

map (Instruction, [Input ]) as the complete in-struction and y as the corresponding response. The mapping function could be the simple con-catenation with some control tokens. Thus D =

{(x1, y 1), (x2, y 2), . . . , (xn, y n)} represents a col-lection of n instruction-response pairs. 

Perplexity In the instruction tuning setting, the model is trained to maximize the likelihood of re-sponse given the corresponding instruction as the condition. Hence, perplexity can be a potential metric to measure the difficulty. Specifically, the perplexity of a given sample (xi, y i) is defined as:    

> PPL (yi|xi) = exp
> (
> −1
> N
> N∑
> j=1
> log p(yi,j |xi, y i, 1, ..., y i,j −1)
> )
> (1)

where N is the length of response yi and yi,j rep-resents the jth token in the response yi.

IFD score Li et al. (2023b) firstly proposes a self-guided method in which no extra models are utilized but needs to calculate Instruction-Following Difficulty (IFD) scores based on the pre-experienced LLM or original pre-trained LLM. The IFD score is a pure statistical metric, that compares the losses or perplexities when the model generates a response yi with and without instructional con-text x1, measuring how much help the instruction provides to the generation of the corresponding response. A higher IFD score, indicating less in-structional help, suggests a greater difficulty. On the contrary, the low IFD score represents that the given instruction can directly benefit the language model largely even without further training, repre-senting the easiness and necessity of the instruction. For a given instruction-following data pair, the IFD score is calculated as follows: IFD (yi|xi) = PPL (yi|xi)

PPL (yi) (2) where PPL (yi|xi) and PPL (yi) denote the perplex-ities of the given model in fitting response yi with and without the instruction xi, respectively. 

2.2 Formulation and Motivations 

Superfiltering aims to find a data filtering score (1) that excels in identifying high-quality and informa-tive training data, and (2) computed by a small and low-cost filter model without further training. To this end, we try to find a data evaluation metric con-sistent between weak and strong language models. Given a candidate score, we investigate whether it is possible to utilize a much weaker language model, e.g. GPT-2, to calculate for the relatively stronger student model. We hypothesize that, al-though the intrinsic abilities between weak and strong language models vary dramatically, indi-cated by the discrepancies of perplexities on the pretraining stage, their ability to perceive instruc-tion difficulty could be similar. To verify our hy-pothesis, experiments are conducted and presented in Section 3. To verify the hypothesis, we conduct a thorough empirical study of the consistency of perplexities computed by different language models on the same instruction-tuning dataset. In Section 3.1, we focus on verifying the consistency of perplexity across weak-to-strong models by comparing their scale and orderings of samples on each dataset. The results show that though the scales vary drastically, the orderings remain consistent, which verifies our hypothesis. In Section 3.2, we conduct the same study on IFD scores, on which both the scales and the orderings are consistent across weak-to-strong models, indicating IFD score as a more promising score for Superfiltering than perplexity. Figure 2 compares each Superfiltering-selected-data finetuned model and the full-data finetuned model by using GPT-4 as a judge to decide their numbers of wins/ties/losses on a test set of instruc-tions. More details of the evaluation metric can be found in Section 4.3. Superfiltering-trained mod-els always outperform the baseline given different base models, datasets, and selection ratios, demon-strating the effectiveness of our proposed weak-to-strong Superfiltering scheme. 

## 3 Weak-to-Strong Consistency 

In this section, we delve into the hypothesis that weak and strong language models share a relatively consistent capability in perceiving the difficulties of instruction tuning samples. 

3.1 Weak-to-Strong Perplexity Consistency 

As mentioned in the previous section, we first need to have a grasp of to what extent language models of different sizes are consistent with each other in understanding instructions and generating corresponding responses. Thus we calculate the perplexity scores of several pretrained language 14257 Figure 3: The distributions of perplexity (top) and IFD score (bottom) computed by five models (left-to-right: weak-to-strong) on three instruction tuning datasets. Observations: (1) The scale of perplexity varies drastically across different models, indicating their difference in generation capability; (2) The scale of IFD scores is consistent across models, indicating their consistency in measuring difficulties.                                                                                      

> Dataset Model Rank Correlation ↑Overlap Ratios ↑
> Name Perplexity IFD score 5% 10% 15% Alpaca GPT-2 0.726 0.679 0.28 0.41 0.49 GPT-2-large 0.790 0.682 0.26 0.40 0.50 GPT-2-XL 0.802 0.693 0.27 0.40 0.49 GPT-NEO 0.846 0.802 0.38 0.51 0.59 LLaMA2-7B 1.000 1.000 1.00 1.00 1.00 Alpaca-GPT4 GPT-2 0.730 0.788 0.24 0.40 0.51 GPT-2-large 0.795 0.820 0.21 0.36 0.48 GPT-2-XL 0.800 0.818 0.18 0.33 0.45 GPT-NEO 0.842 0.876 0.33 0.52 0.62 LLaMA2-7B 1.000 1.000 1.00 1.00 1.00 Wizard 70k GPT-2 0.763 0.802 0.42 0.54 0.61 GPT-2-large 0.809 0.848 0.44 0.58 0.65 GPT-2-XL 0.821 0.855 0.44 0.57 0.65 GPT-NEO 0.857 0.893 0.52 0.63 0.69 LLaMA2-7B 1.000 1.000 1.00 1.00 1.00

Table 1: The rank correlation coefficient (Spearman’s ρ)and overlap ratio (of selected data) between LLaMA2-7B and smaller language models when applied as filter models on three widely-used instruction tuning datasets. When calculating Spearman’s ρ, the samples are sorted by perplexity or IFD scores calculated by different filter models. For the overlap ratio, we consider three data filtering budgets, i.e., when 5%, 10%, or 15% of the dataset are selected. The large rank coefficient between LLaMA2-7B and other smaller models indicates the consistency of different models in perceiving the diffi-culties of instruction tuning data. 

models, including relatively small language models like GPT-2 (124M), GPT-2-large (774M), GPT-2-XL (1.5B) (Radford et al., 2019), GPT-NEO (1.3B) (Black et al., 2021) and recent relatively strong LLaMA2-7b (Touvron et al., 2023b), on several instruction-tuning dataset including the Alpaca (Taori et al., 2023), Alpaca-GPT4 (Peng et al., 2023), and WizardLM 70k (Xu et al., 2023). The results are shown in Figure 3 (upper), where each box presents a perplexity distribution of a given dataset and language model. A clear tendency can be found that the stronger the language models are, the lower the perplexities are, which is consistent with the common beliefs for LLM pretraining: the better a language model, the lower this perplexity. The above experimental results only showcase the perplexity scales of different models and ne-glect the potential perplexity ordering/ranking of different data samples, which is much more vital for data filtering. Thus to evaluate the similarity in perplexity ordering on a given dataset between different models, Spearman’s rank correlation co-efficient (Spearman’s ρ) is utilized. Spearman’s 

ρ is a non-parametric measure used to assess the strength and direction of the relationship between two variables that are ranked or ordinal in nature. For two lists containing the same elements but dif-ferent ordering, this value measures the similarity of the ordering in the range of −1 to 1. The closer the value is to 1, the more consistent the ordering of these two lists. Specifically, within each dataset D, we sort the data samples based on the perplexity scores cal-culated by different models, resulting in several lists containing the same data but different orders, noted as DPPL, GPT-2 , DPPL, LLaMA2-7B , etc. Since most of the fine-tuned experiments in our work are implemented on the LLaMA2-7B model, we set 

DPPL, LLaMA2-7B as our standard sorted list and cal-14258 culate the Spearman’s ρ between the sorted lists of small language models and LLaMA2-7B: 

ρPPL, GPT-2 = g(DPPL, GPT-2 , D PPL, LLaMA2-7B )

(3) where g is the function of calculating this coef-ficient. All the resulting values on different in-struction tuning datasets and different models are presented in Table 1, the Spearman’s Coefficient-Perplexity column. From the results, we can see even the lowest co-efficient value is still greater than 0.7, calculated between GPT-2(124M) and LLaMA2-7B, and the highest coefficient value is greater than 0.85 , calcu-lated between GPT-NEO(1.3B) and LLaMA2-7B. The values presented in the table are reasonably high, indicating the consistent capability of differ-ent models in perceiving instructions. Moreover, there is also a clear tendency that the stronger the language models are, the higher the coefficient val-ues. Comparing the perplexity distributions in Fig-ure 3 (upper) and the coefficient values in Table 1, a clear consistency can be revealed: Despite the large variance in the scales of perplexities generated by different language models, representing the intrin-sic abilities of different language models, the high consistency in the perplexity ordering indicates the similarity of them to understand instructions. That is to say, for a given instruction tuning sample, if the weak language models find it hard to generate based on the corresponding instruction, the strong models might probably feel the same way even though their probability of generating this response is much larger, and vice versa. This phenomenon directly provides a glance at the weak-to-strong perplexity consistency, which serves as the basis for utilizing weak language mod-els as the proxies for strong language models. 

3.2 Weak-to-Strong IFD Consistency 

Though a clear consistency in the perplexities of different language models is revealed by the above experiments, the perplexity does not directly rep-resent the difficulty or quality of the instruction tuning sample and is thus not able to be used for the data section. Thus we further extend our find-ings to the Instruction-Following Difficulty (IFD) score proposed by Cherry LLM (Li et al., 2023b). It is used to select a subset of high-quality samples from the given instruction-tuning dataset to train an LLM with better performance. Similarly, we calculate the IFD scores on differ-ent instruction-tuning datasets with different lan-guage models and draw their distributions as shown in Figure 3 (lower). We observe that though the per-plexity scales vary noticeably between models, the IFD scales remain similar, indicating its potential to be the general selection metric for different mod-els. Furthermore, the IFD-based Spearman’s ρ are also presented in Table 1 Spearman’s Coefficient-IFD score column. Similar to the perplexity-based coefficient values, IFD-based values also remain high, indicating a strong consistency of IFD rank-ings calculated on different models. Such a con-sistency validates the scalability of weaker models in evaluating instruction difficulty, indicating their adeptness at identifying complex instructions akin to their stronger counterparts. Another interest-ing phenomenon is that the IFD-based coefficient values are greater than perplexity-based values on high-quality datasets, e.g. Alpaca-GPT4 and Wiz-ardLM 70k, indicating an even higher consistency in IFD scores for these datasets. To provide an even further apparent glance at this consistency, we calculate the overlap ratio when uti-lizing IFD scores to select the high-quality subset. The performances of the LLMs could be slightly estimated by the overlap ratio due to the previous success of this metric. As the percentage thresh-old increases from 5% to 15% , there is a signifi-cant and growing overlap in the samples identified by the weaker models and strong models like the LLaMA2-7B model. Although the overlap is not complete, it is substantial, this increasing overlap with higher thresholds reinforces our hypothesis, affirming a consistent and scalable capability in in-struction evaluation across models of varying sizes. This weak-to-strong IFD consistency directly verifies our hypothesis that language models with different sizes possess similar capabilities in un-derstanding the difficulty of the instructions, even though their intrinsic abilities are varied. It means that the difficult instruction tuning samples defined by the IFD scores are probably “generally” diffi-cult no matter what language model is utilized for the calculation. This phenomenon directly makes it possible to utilize weak language models as the proxies for strong language models for calculating the IFD scores, and thus, to select data for instruc-tion tuning. 

3.3 Superfiltering 

From the above section, we observe that the IFD score is a highly consistent metric when calculat-14259 ing based on different instruction-tuning datasets and varied-size language models. Thus we pro-pose “Superfiltering”, the first approach utilizing only small language models, i.e. GPT-2 (124M) (Radford et al., 2019) to filter data for the instruc-tion tuning of modern LLMs. Superfiltering uses smaller, less resource-intensive models (referred to as “weak” models) as effective substitutes for larger models (referred to as “strong” models) in the data evaluations. For the first time, making this process so efficient as to put it into practical usage. Specifically, following Li et al. (2023b), for the given instruction-tuning dataset, the GPT-2 model is directly used to calculate the IFD score of each sample. Then the top k-percent samples with the highest IFD scores under 1 are selected for faster instruction tuning. 

## 4 Experimental Setup 

4.1 Datasets 

The Alpaca dataset (Taori et al., 2023) is devel-oped by Stanford University, comprises 52,000 instruction-following samples, and was created us-ing the self-instruct paradigm (Wang et al., 2023b). This dataset was generated by leveraging OpenAI’s text-davinci-003 model. The Alpaca dataset repre-sents a classical dataset with moderate qualities, to further verify our method on the originally high-quality dataset, we also implement our method on the Alpaca-GPT4 dataset (Peng et al., 2023), which contains the responses generated by GPT4. 

4.2 Implementation Details 

We utilize the prompt and code base from Vicuna (Chiang et al., 2023) and flash attention (Dao et al., 2022) while the overall training arguments are aligned with the common training configuration. The Adam optimizer (Kingma and Ba, 2017), with a 2×10 −5 learning rate for the LLaMA2-7B model (Touvron et al., 2023b) and a 1 × 10 −5 learning rate for the LLaMA2-13B model, and a batch size of 128 , steer the training across three epochs with a max length of 2048 . The warmup rate is set to 0.03 .

4.3 Evaluation Metrics 4.3.1 Automatic Evaluation 

To evaluate the effectiveness of our method, we uti-lize 3 commonly used automatic evaluation metrics, including (1) Pair-wise Comparison , (2) Open LLM Leaderboard and (3) Alpaca Eval . 1

4.3.2 Human Evaluation 

To further validate the effectiveness of our method, we conducted a further human study to evaluate the effectiveness of our method. Specifically, we ran-domly sample 100 instructions from the WizardLM test set to form a new instruction set. Then 3 hu-man participants are given the task of comparing the responses generated by the comparing models with the criteria same as the previous pair-wise evaluation, i.e. Helpfulness, Relevance, Accuracy, and Level of Detail. For each comparison, 3 op-tions are given (Win, Tie, and Loss) and the final results are determined by the majority voting of the participants. The human studies are conducted based on LLaMA2-7B on two models: (1) Alpaca 5% VS. Alpaca 100%. (2) Alpaca-GPT4 5% VS. Alpaca-GPT4 100%. 

## 5 Experimental Result 

5.1 Main results 

In this section, we present the evaluation results of three different evaluation settings as described in the previous section as shown in Table 5. The Pair-Wise Winning Score indicates the result directly comparing with the corresponding model trained with full data. These values that are greater than 

1.0 represent better responses generated by our Su-perfiltering models than full data models. The de-tailed win-tie-lose numbers are presented in Figure 2. Moreover, the performance of our models and baseline models on the Huggingface Open LLM Leaderboard and the AlpacaEval Leaderboard 

are also presented in Table 5 where we can see our models using 5% , 10% , 15% data outperform the models trained with full data on both benchmarks on both LLaMA2-7B and LLaMA-13B settings. These results further showcase the effectiveness of our Superfiltering. Moreover, the usefulness of Superfiltering on the high-quality Alpaca-GPT4 dataset further shows the potential of our method, which is astonishing that a weak language model like GPT-2 is able to filter the data responses gen-erated by GPT-4. 

For the human evaluation , we compare the per-formances between models trained with 5% Super-filtring data and full data based on LLaMA2-7B models, on Alpaca and Alpaca-GPT4 Datasets. In 

> 1Detailed description of evaluation metrics can be found in Appendix B.

14260 Dataset/ Superfilter Pairwise ↑ Huggingface Open LLM Leaderboard ↑ AlpacaEval ↑                                                                                                                                

> Base Model Ratio(Size) Winning Score Average ARC HellaSwag MMLU TruthfulQA Win Rate
> Alpaca/ 100% 1.000 55.25 54.35 78.65 47.02 40.98 27.75
> LLaMA2-7B 5%(2,600) 1.133 55.6 756.57 80.15 45.21 40.74 33.04
> 10%(5,200) 1.101 56.97 58.02 80.57 47.16 42.14 -15%(7,800) 1.193 56.61 56.23 80.29 46.73 43.21 -
> Alpaca/ 100% 1.000 58.78 57.59 81.98 54.05 41.49 35.00
> LLaMA2-13B 5%(2,600) 1.174 60.96 61.60 83.84 55.79 42.63 45.71
> 10%(5,200) 1.069 61.11 62.12 83.74 55.09 43.50 -15%(7,800) 1.142 60.90 60.92 83.58 55.24 43.86 -
> Alpaca-GPT4/ 100% 1.000 58.71 54.69 80.05 47.89 52.21 71.32
> LLaMA2-7B 5%(2,600) 1.014 59.66 56.74 81.19 46.80 53.92 72.13
> 10%(5,200) 1.064 59.80 57.42 81.79 45.67 54.33 -15%(7,800) 1.078 60.02 57.00 81.21 46.15 55.72 -
> Alpaca-GPT4/ 100% 1.000 60.81 57.94 82.22 54.84 48.25 77.86
> LLaMA2-13B 5%(2,600) 1.041 63.29 62.29 84.96 55.78 50.13 78.15
> 10%(5,200) 1.046 63.65 62.63 84.51 55.39 52.06 -15%(7,800) 1.078 63.65 62.88 84.32 55.35 52.05 -

Table 2: Comparison of Superfiltering with four data selection ratios (5%, 10%, 15%, 100%) when finetuning two LLMs (LLaMA2-7B/13B) on two datasets (Alpaca and Alpaca-GPT4). The finetuned models are evaluated by the pair-wise winning score (comparison to the baseline model finetuned on 100% data), Open LLM Leaderboard, and AlpacaEval. In the parathesis are the ratio of data being used and its exact number. The winning score is calculated as (Num(Win) −Num(Lose)) /Num(All) +1 , where the win-tie-lose numbers are reported in Figure 2. The consistent improvement on all the three evaluation benchmarks demonstrates the effectiveness of Superfitering. 

Ablation Pairwise Winning Score ↑

Data Selection Budget 5% 10% 15% 

Strategy: Random 0.936 0.968 0.977 Diversity 0.927 0.977 0.982 Perplexity 0.261 0.569 0.610 Filter: GPT-2-large 1.165 1.046 1.193 GPT-2-XL 1.064 1.165 1.128 GPT-NEO 1.096 1.197 1.156 LLaMA2-7B 1.303 1.330 1.294 Superfilter (IFD, GPT-2) 1.133 1.101 1.193 

Table 3: Ablation study of data selection strategies and filter models on finetuning LLaMA2-7B using the Alpaca dataset. The pairwise winning score compares each finetuned model with the full-data finetuned model and computes (Num(Win) −Num(Lose)) /Num(All) +1 .All the comparisons are performed by GPT-4 on the WizardLM test set. 

the comparison (1) Alpaca 5% VS. Alpaca 100%, our model wins on 50 out of 100 instruction, ties on 

18 , and losses on 32 instructions. In the compari-son (2) Alpaca-GPT4 5% VS. Alpaca-GPT4 100%, our model wins on 49 out of 100 instruction, ties on 5, and losses on 46 instructions. This human evaluation of Superfiltering further validates our method. 

5.2 Comparison with Other Methods 

In this subsection, we compare our method with three other widely accepted instruction-tuning data selection methods on LLaMA2-7B using the Al-paca Dataset, in terms of performance and effi-ciency. “ChatGPT score” represents utilizing Chat-GPT to evaluate the quality of the Alpaca data samples proposed by Chen et al. (2023b). “Reward-model score” represents utilizing extra reward mod-els to rate the given data samples, in this exper-iment, “OpenAssistant/reward-model-deberta-v3-large-v2” is utilized following Bukharin and Zhao (2023); Du et al. (2023). “IFD score” represents directly utilizing the base model to be trained to cal-culate the Instruction-Following Difficulty scores proposed by Li et al. (2023b). As shown in the Table 4. Superfiltering outper-forms ChatGPT and Reward-model scores in terms of winning scores and filtering efficiency. Com-pared with Superfiltering, utilizing ChatGPT for selection needs further costs on utilizing API mod-els, and its efficiency is largely constrained by the rate limits set by the API company. Utilizing out-side reward models is a cost-free method, while the efficiency can not be guaranteed: it is 175 ×

slower than our Superfiltering. Directly calculating IFD scores based on the base model is a promising method as it is the only method that has a better 14261 Comparison Pairwise Winning Score ↑ Time Data Selection Budget 5% 10 % 15 % (min) Superfiltering (ours) - - - 8vs. ChatGPT score 1.028 1.174 1.170 120 vs. Reward score 1.280 1.096 1.147 1400 vs. IFD score (LLaMA2-7B) 0.853 0.761 0.927 161     

> Table 4: Comparison with Other Methods in terms of performance and efficiency. The Pairwise Winning Scores are calculated between models using our method and other methods. All the comparisons are performed by GPT-4 on the WizardLM test set and the values that are greater than 1.0represent our models are better and vice versa. The time shown represents the time used for data filtering.

performance than our Superfiltering, as it selects the data that best matches the model. However, our Superfilrtering is 20 × faster. From the comparison, it is observed that our model largely reduces the time used for data filtering, and we are the only method that makes the filtering time shorter than the later training time, making this process feasible in practical usage. Moreover, our filtering method can be implemented on consumer-level GPUs with much smaller graphic memories like 6 GB since we only utilize the GPT-2 model, while all other methods require large industry-level GPUs. 

5.3 Ablation Study 

In this subsection, extensive ablation experiments are conducted to validate the effectiveness of our Superfiltering. The experiments are performed on the LLaMA2-7B model using the Alpaca dataset. Our focus is on two aspects: the impact of different data selection strategies and the effect of using various language models for data selection. All models are trained under the same settings. As shown in Table 3, in addition to our method “Superfiltering (GPT-2)”, we also try several baseline strategies: “Random” represents the models trained with randomly selected data. “Diversity” represents the models trained with data considering only diversity, by utilizing the k-means algorithm. “Perplexity” represents the models trained with data based on the perplexity calculated on GPT-2. Moreover, the lower part of the table lists the models using the IFD score to select the training subset, powered by other language models. The performances of models are assessed by the pair-wise winning score, which is calculated as (Num(Win) −Num(Lose)) /Num(All) 

+1 , and all the comparisons are performed by GPT4 on the WizardLM test set. As shown in Table 3, compared with other strate-gies, models trained with our method consistently outperform the models trained on the full dataset, indicating the efficacy of our method. Regarding the impact of different language models, whichever language model is utilized to calculate the IFD scores, the corresponding models would surpass the baseline model, indicating the strong consistency and transferability of the IFD score as the selection metric. Moreover, the models using LLaMA2-7B reasonably achieve the highest performance, due to the consistency between the model to calculate the IFD scores and the model to be trained. 

## 6 Further Discussion 

6.1 “Plug-and-Play” without Additional Training 

Our Superfiltering introduces a transformative ad-vantage: the unnecessity of training for even weak language models and the unnecessity of the extra hold-out sets. Traditional proxy-based methods like Coleman et al. (2020) and Nguyen et al. (2022) are required to further train weak models to bridge the performance gap with stronger models. In the context of instruction tuning data selection, model training or a hold-out set is always necessary if no extra strong models like ChatGPT or other trained reward models are utilized. Lu et al. (2023) utilizes chatGPT to tag the instruction datasets and train LLMs for tagging instruction samples based on these data. Li et al. (2023d) requires a holdout test set as the indicator for the data improvement. Cao et al. (2023) proposes to train several models based on losses on unseen datasets and obtain a regression model to estimate data qualities. However, our study reveals that pre-trained weak models are naturally effectively capable of acting as proxies for strong models when utilizing the IFD for data selection. These models do not necessitate fine-tuning on specific datasets, thereby reducing the risk of out-of-distribution issues. This innova-tive approach not only simplifies the data selection process but also revolutionizes the efficiency and applicability of such methods in large language model instruction tuning. 

6.2 Sperfiltering as Dataset Assessment 

Our finding, the consistency of perplexity-based metrics across weak and strong language models, 14262 might push forward the usage of small language models as proxy models, not only in the area of data selection. Moreover, our finding provides an efficient and general way to assess the instruction data of the whole dataset. 

As illustrated in Figure 3, a preliminary assess-ment of the dataset can be made by examining the violin plots of the Instruction Followed Difficulty (IFD) scores. The classic Alpaca dataset, known for its relatively lower quality, exhibits a violin plot with wide upper and lower sections, indicat-ing significant variance in data quality. The Wiz-ardLM dataset, generated by prompting ChatGPT 3.5, displays complex instructions but is affected by generation noise, reflected by its violin plot which is wide at the top and has a long, narrow tail. In contrast, the Alpaca-GPT4 dataset, created using GPT-4, demonstrates a higher quality lower bound, as evidenced by its violin plot with a more compressed lower section, indicating fewer low-quality instructions. To our knowledge, there is no visualization that can represent the quality of a dataset with different characteristics, (some work might draw the distribution of verb-noun pairs, but it only represents the diversity and can not reflect the overall quality of the dataset). 

6.3 Why Weak-to-Strong Consistent? 

We hypothesize this Weak-to-Strong consistency can be explained from (1) the perspective of Per-plexity and (2) the perspective of String Pattern ,presented in Appendix D. 

6.4 Superfiltering with Diversity 

We further incorporate the diversity metric into the Superfiltering, which further reduces the data used for training, presented in the Appenix A. 

## 7 Related Work 

7.1 Instruction Tuning Data Selection 

Instruction tuning (Wei et al., 2022; Sanh et al., 2022; Longpre et al., 2023a; Liu et al., 2023a) is a widely-used training paradigm to equip LLMs with the instruction-following ability. To further select the data for more efficient instruction tuning, exist-ing automatic data selection methods mainly utilize extra LLMs for the selection. Lu et al. (2023) uti-lizes proprietary chatGPT to tag the instruction data to ensure diversity and complexity. Chen et al. (2023b) utilizes proprietary LLMs chatGPT and Claude2 to assess the quality of the instruction data, generating both ratings and explanations. Du et al. (2023) and Bukharin and Zhao (2023) uti-lize an extra reward model to assess the quality of data and utilize these scores as a part of their method. Li et al. (2023b) firstly proposes a self-guided method in which no extra LLMs are utilized but still needs to calculate Instruction-Following Difficulty (IFD) scores based on the original pre-trained LLM. Though effective, these methods overly rely on large language models and are too time-consuming to put into practical use. 

7.2 Small Model Proxies for Large Models 

The use of proxy models is increasingly recognized in machine learning, particularly when resources are constrained or there is a limited understanding of the original model’s architecture. Chen et al. (2023a) and Hase et al. (2020) demonstrate the utility of lightweight proxy models in evaluating free-text rationales. Similarly, Puigcerver et al. (2021) leverages embeddings from expert models with a k-nearest neighbors classifier to simplify the training of more complex systems. Coleman et al. (2020) and the FAMIE (Nguyen et al., 2022) ap-ply downscaled proxy models in fields like image classification and information extraction, utilizing techniques such as layer removal and knowledge distillation for aligning these proxies with larger models. Burns et al. (2023) explores the concept of enhancing larger models through weak supervision, and training on weaker model labels. 

## 8 Conclusion 

In this paper, we reveal the consistency between weak and strong language models in perceiving instruction difficulties. Based on the consistency, we present “Superfiltering”, a novel and efficient approach for data filtering in the instruction tuning of LLMs. By effectively utilizing weaker mod-els as proxies for evaluating instructional data, we achieve a significant leap in efficiency, accelerat-ing the data filtering process largely. The experi-mental results affirm that our method considerably reduces computational overhead while maintain-ing or even improving the instruction tuning per-formance of LLMs. It is astonishing that a weak language model like GPT-2 is able to filter the data responses generated by GPT-4. Our Superfiltering marks a substantial contribution by offering a scal-able, resource-efficient, and effective strategy for the advancement of AI technologies. 14263 Limitations 

Our study introduces “Superfiltering” as an inno-vative approach to enhance the instruction tuning process of LLMs through efficient data selection using smaller models. While we have observed promising results, several areas warrant further ex-ploration: (1) Superfiltering primarily utilizes IFD scores to select data, focusing on instruction diffi-culty. Future enhancements should include addi-tional dimensions such as data diversity. (2) There are 3 datasets and 2 LLaMA2 base models are in-volved, further research is recommended to explore its effectiveness with a broader array of LLMs and Datasets. 

## References 

Sid Black, Gao Leo, Phil Wang, Connor Leahy, and Stella Biderman. 2021. GPT-Neo: Large Scale Autoregressive Language Modeling with Mesh-Tensorflow. If you use this software, please cite it using these metadata. Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Ma-teusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 33, pages 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc. Alexander Bukharin and Tuo Zhao. 2023. Data diversity matters for robust instruction tuning. Collin Burns, Pavel Izmailov, Jan Hendrik Kirchner, Bowen Baker, Leo Gao, Leopold Aschenbrenner, Yining Chen, Adrien Ecoffet, Manas Joglekar, Jan Leike, Ilya Sutskever, and Jeff Wu. 2023. Weak-to-strong generalization: Eliciting strong capabilities with weak supervision. Yihan Cao, Yanbin Kang, and Lichao Sun. 2023. In-struction mining: High-quality instruction data selec-tion for large language models. Hanjie Chen, Faeze Brahman, Xiang Ren, Yangfeng Ji, Yejin Choi, and Swabha Swayamdipta. 2023a. REV: Information-theoretic evaluation of free-text ratio-nales. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2007–2030, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Lichang Chen, Shiyang Li, Jun Yan, Hai Wang, Kalpa Gunaratna, Vikas Yadav, Zheng Tang, Vijay Srini-vasan, Tianyi Zhou, Heng Huang, and Hongxia Jin. 2023b. Alpagasus: Training a better alpaca with fewer data. Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. 2023. Vicuna: An open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality. Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and Oyvind Tafjord. 2018. Think you have solved question an-swering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning challenge. Cody Coleman, Christopher Yeh, Stephen Mussmann, Baharan Mirzasoleiman, Peter Bailis, Percy Liang, Jure Leskovec, and Matei Zaharia. 2020. Selection via proxy: Efficient data selection for deep learning. In 8th International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020 . OpenReview.net. Tri Dao, Daniel Y. Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. 2022. Flashattention: Fast and memory-efficient exact attention with io-awareness. Tim Dettmers, Artidoro Pagnoni, Ari Holtzman, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2023. Qlora: Efficient finetuning of quantized llms. Qianlong Du, Chengqing Zong, and Jiajun Zhang. 2023. Mods: Model-oriented data selection for instruction tuning. Zhengxiao Du, Yujie Qian, Xiao Liu, Ming Ding, Jiezhong Qiu, Zhilin Yang, and Jie Tang. 2022. GLM: General language model pretraining with autoregres-sive blank infilling. In Proceedings of the 60th An-nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 320–335, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Rohan Taori, Tianyi Zhang, Ishaan Gulrajani, Jimmy Ba, Carlos Guestrin, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. 2023. Alpaca-farm: A simulation framework for methods that learn from human feedback. Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Anthony DiPofi, Charles Foster, Laurence Golding, Jeffrey Hsu, Kyle McDonell, Niklas Muennighoff, Jason Phang, Laria Reynolds, Eric Tang, Anish Thite, Ben Wang, Kevin Wang, and Andy Zou. 2021. A framework for few-shot language model evaluation. Peter Hase, Shiyue Zhang, Harry Xie, and Mohit Bansal. 2020. Leakage-adjusted simulatability: Can models generate non-trivial explanations of their behavior in natural language? In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 , pages 4351–4367, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. 14264 Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2021. Measuring massive multitask language under-standing. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Men-sch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guil-laume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, Lélio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. 2023. Mistral 7b. Daniel Khashabi, Sewon Min, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Oyvind Tafjord, Peter Clark, and Han-naneh Hajishirzi. 2020. UNIFIEDQA: Crossing for-mat boundaries with a single QA system. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 , pages 1896–1907, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2017. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. Miyoung Ko, Jinhyuk Lee, Hyunjae Kim, Gangwoo Kim, and Jaewoo Kang. 2020. Look at the first sentence: Position bias in question answering. In 

Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) ,pages 1109–1121, Online. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Ming Li, Jiuhai Chen, Lichang Chen, and Tianyi Zhou. 2024a. Can llms speak for diverse people? tuning llms via debate to generate controllable controversial statements. ArXiv , abs/2402.10614. Ming Li, Lichang Chen, Jiuhai Chen, Shwai He, Ji-uxiang Gu, and Tianyi Zhou. 2024b. Selective reflection-tuning: Student-selected data recycling for llm instruction-tuning. ArXiv , abs/2402.10110. Ming Li, Lichang Chen, Jiuhai Chen, Shwai He, and Tianyi Zhou. 2023a. Reflection-tuning: Recycling data for better instruction-tuning. In NeurIPS 2023 Workshop on Instruction Tuning and Instruction Fol-lowing .Ming Li, Yong Zhang, Zhitao Li, Jiuhai Chen, Lichang Chen, Ning Cheng, Jianzong Wang, Tianyi Zhou, and Jing Xiao. 2023b. From quantity to quality: Boosting llm performance with self-guided data selection for instruction tuning. ArXiv , abs/2308.12032. Xuechen Li, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Carlos Guestrin, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. 2023c. Alpacaeval: An automatic evaluator of instruction-following models. 

https://github.com/tatsu-lab/alpaca_eval .Yunshui Li, Binyuan Hui, Xiaobo Xia, Jiaxi Yang, Min Yang, Lei Zhang, Shuzheng Si, Junhao Liu, Tongliang Liu, Fei Huang, and Yongbin Li. 2023d. One shot learning as instruction data prospector for large language models. Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. 2022. TruthfulQA: Measuring how models mimic human falsehoods. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 3214–3252, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics. Fuxiao Liu, Xiaoyang Wang, Wenlin Yao, Jianshu Chen, Kaiqiang Song, Sangwoo Cho, Yaser Yacoob, and Dong Yu. 2023a. Mmc: Advancing multimodal chart understanding with large-scale instruction tuning. Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang, Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. 2023b. G-eval: Nlg evaluation using gpt-4 with better human align-ment. S. Longpre, Le Hou, Tu Vu, Albert Webson, Hyung Won Chung, Yi Tay, Denny Zhou, Quoc V. Le, Barret Zoph, Jason Wei, and Adam Roberts. 2023a. The flan collection: Designing data and methods for effective instruction tuning. ArXiv , abs/2301.13688. Shayne Longpre, Le Hou, Tu Vu, Albert Webson, Hyung Won Chung, Yi Tay, Denny Zhou, Quoc V Le, Barret Zoph, Jason Wei, et al. 2023b. The flan collection: Designing data and methods for effective instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13688 .Keming Lu, Hongyi Yuan, Zheng Yuan, Runji Lin, Jun-yang Lin, Chuanqi Tan, Chang Zhou, and Jingren Zhou. 2023. #instag: Instruction tagging for analyz-ing supervised fine-tuning of large language models. Minh Van Nguyen, Nghia Ngo, Bonan Min, and Thien Nguyen. 2022. FAMIE: A fast active learning frame-work for multilingual information extraction. In Pro-ceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North Amer-ican Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies: System Demonstrations , pages 131–139, Hybrid: Seattle, Washington + Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. OpenAI. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report. Baolin Peng, Chunyuan Li, Pengcheng He, Michel Gal-ley, and Jianfeng Gao. 2023. Instruction tuning with gpt-4. Joan Puigcerver, Carlos Riquelme Ruiz, Basil Mustafa, Cédric Renggli, André Susano Pinto, Sylvain Gelly, Daniel Keysers, and Neil Houlsby. 2021. Scalable transfer learning with expert models. In 9th Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021 .OpenReview.net. Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. 2019. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERT-networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing 14265 and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natu-ral Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 3982–3992, Hong Kong, China. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen H. Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai, Antoine Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Arun Raja, Manan Dey, M Saiful Bari, Canwen Xu, Urmish Thakker, Shanya Sharma Sharma, Eliza Szczechla, Taewoon Kim, Gunjan Chhablani, Nihal V. Nayak, Debajyoti Datta, Jonathan Chang, Mike Tian-Jian Jiang, Han Wang, Matteo Manica, Sheng Shen, Zheng Xin Yong, Harshit Pandey, Rachel Bawden, Thomas Wang, Tr-ishala Neeraj, Jos Rozen, Abheesht Sharma, An-drea Santilli, Thibault Févry, Jason Alan Fries, Ryan Teehan, Teven Le Scao, Stella Biderman, Leo Gao, Thomas Wolf, and Alexander M. Rush. 2022. Multi-task prompted training enables zero-shot task gener-alization. In The Tenth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022 . OpenReview.net. Andrea Sottana, Bin Liang, Kai Zou, and Zheng Yuan. 2023. Evaluation metrics in the era of GPT-4: Reli-ably evaluating large language models on sequence to sequence tasks. In Proceedings of the 2023 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 8776–8788, Singapore. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. 2023. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model. https:// github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca .Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Armand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. 2023a. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Al-bert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, An-thony Hartshorn, Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee, Di-ana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Mar-tinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra, Igor Moly-bog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizen-stein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi, Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subrama-nian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Tay-lor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Ro-driguez, Robert Stojnic, Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. 2023b. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. Peiyi Wang, Lei Li, Liang Chen, Dawei Zhu, Binghuai Lin, Yunbo Cao, Qi Liu, Tianyu Liu, and Zhifang Sui. 2023a. Large language models are not fair evaluators. Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A. Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023b. Self-instruct: Aligning language models with self-generated instructions. In Proceed-ings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 13484–13508, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yizhong Wang, Swaroop Mishra, Pegah Alipoormo-labashi, Yeganeh Kordi, Amirreza Mirzaei, Atharva Naik, Arjun Ashok, Arut Selvan Dhanasekaran, Anjana Arunkumar, David Stap, Eshaan Pathak, Giannis Karamanolakis, Haizhi Lai, Ishan Puro-hit, Ishani Mondal, Jacob Anderson, Kirby Kuznia, Krima Doshi, Kuntal Kumar Pal, Maitreya Patel, Mehrad Moradshahi, Mihir Parmar, Mirali Purohit, Neeraj Varshney, Phani Rohitha Kaza, Pulkit Verma, Ravsehaj Singh Puri, Rushang Karia, Savan Doshi, Shailaja Keyur Sampat, Siddhartha Mishra, Sujan Reddy A, Sumanta Patro, Tanay Dixit, and Xudong Shen. 2022. Super-NaturalInstructions: Generaliza-tion via declarative instructions on 1600+ NLP tasks. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empiri-cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 5085–5109, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du, Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V Le. 2022. Finetuned language mod-els are zero-shot learners. In International Confer-ence on Learning Representations .Can Xu, Qingfeng Sun, Kai Zheng, Xiubo Geng, Pu Zhao, Jiazhan Feng, Chongyang Tao, and Daxin Jiang. 2023. Wizardlm: Empowering large language models to follow complex instructions. Xiaohan Xu, Ming Li, Chongyang Tao, Tao Shen, Reynold Cheng, Jinyang Li, Can Xu, Dacheng Tao, and Tianyi Zhou. 2024. A survey on knowledge dis-tillation of large language models. Qinyuan Ye, Bill Yuchen Lin, and Xiang Ren. 2021. CrossFit: A few-shot learning challenge for cross-task generalization in NLP. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 7163–7189, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics. Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. 2019. HellaSwag: Can a ma-chine really finish your sentence? In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics , pages 4791–4800, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. 14266 Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric. P Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. Chunting Zhou, Pengfei Liu, Puxin Xu, Srini Iyer, Jiao Sun, Yuning Mao, Xuezhe Ma, Avia Efrat, Ping Yu, Lili Yu, Susan Zhang, Gargi Ghosh, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Omer Levy. 2023. Lima: Less is more for alignment. 14267 A Superfiltering with Diversity 

Though Superfiltering shows promising perfor-mance with great efficiency, it can also be im-plemented together with other dimensions such as data diversity. Motivated by recent work that further includes Diversity metrics in the data se-lection process, we introduce an extended ver-sion of Superfiltering, Superfiltering with Diversity (Superfiltering.D ). We hypothesize that the diversity metrics work better when implemented on a high-quality data subset than the whole dataset with mixed quality. Thus we propose to first utilize Superfiltering to select a subset with relatively high quality, then fur-ther utilize Facility Location Function 2 to further compress the selected data. Compared with other diversity metrics, the Facility Location Function can strike a balance between capturing diversity and ensuring the representation of different clus-ters or regions within the data, it ensures a global view of the given high-quality subset. To further preserve the efficiency of our Super-filtering.D, we utilize “sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-L6-v2” (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019) as the encoder, which only has approximately 80M parameters. In our preliminary experiments on the Alpaca and Alpaca-GPT4 dataset, where we first select 20% of the data by Superfiltering, then uti-lize the Facility Location Function to further select 

2% of the data. The models trained with 2% of the data have a comparable or better performance than full data models. 

> 2https://apricot-select.readthedocs.io/en/ latest/functions/facilityLocation.html

14268 Dataset/ Superfiltering Pairwise ↑ Huggingface Open LLM Leaderboard ↑                                   

> Base Model Ratio(Size) Winning Score Average ARC HellaSwag MMLU TruthfulQA
> Alpaca/ 100% 1.000 55.25 54.35 78.65 47.02 40.98
> LLaMA2-7B 2%(1,040) 1.028 55.43 55.97 79.89 45.51 40.34
> Alpaca-GPT4/ 100% 1.000 58.71 54.69 80.05 47.89 52.21
> LLaMA2-7B 2%(1,040) 1.078 58.70 56.48 80.30 45.23 52.79

Table 5: Comparison between Superfiltering.D with 2% data and full data model on two datasets (Alpaca and Alpaca-GPT4). The finetuned models are evaluated by the pair-wise winning score (comparison to the baseline model finetuned on 100% data) and Open LLM Leaderboard. In the parathesis are the ratio of data being used and its exact number. 14269 B Evaluation Metric 

B.1 Pair-wise comparison 

Evaluating responses generated by Large Language Models (LLMs) like GPT-4 remains a complex and ongoing research area, particularly for open-domain questions where establishing a clear ground truth is challenging. Traditional methods often fall short in assessing the instruction-following abil-ity of these models. Recent trends, however, in-volve using LLMs themselves, such as GPT-4, as evaluators, a practice that has gained widespread acceptance in the field (Touvron et al., 2023b; Chi-ang et al., 2023; Dettmers et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023b). Previous studies (Zheng et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023c; Sottana et al., 2023) have shown that GPT4’s evaluations are consistent with human eval-uations. We utilized the testing instruction set from WizardLM (Xu et al., 2023) and Vicuna (Chiang et al., 2023) which contain 218 and 80 diverse human-curated instructions respectively. Our study adopts the evaluation strategy as out-lined by Chen et al. (2023b); Li et al. (2023b,a), involving a detailed rating system for model-generated responses. Each response is scored re-flecting various dimensions such as the accuracy and relevance of the response. This method is in line with previous research efforts to assess the ef-fectiveness of language models more accurately. Moreover, to address the issue of positional bias, as discussed in the works of Ko et al. (2020); Wang et al. (2023a), we present the responses generated by the model in two separate sequences for eval-uation by the LLM judge. This approach aims to ensure a more balanced and unbiased assessment of the model’s performance. Then for each instruc-tion, we compare the responses by "Win-Tie-Loss". 

B.2 AlapcaEval Leaderboard 

The AlpacaEval Leaderboard, utilizing the Alpaca-Farm (Dubois et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023c) eval-uation dataset, is an automated, efficient, and re-liable evaluation tool for LLMs. It benchmarks LLMs’ performance in following generic user in-structions by comparing their outputs with those from Davinci003, demonstrating high alignment with human expert annotations. AlpacaFarm, un-derlying AlpacaEval, is a cost-effective simulator for research on learning from human feedback, significantly reducing the time and cost tradition-ally associated with such studies. While AlpacaE-val offers valuable insights, it primarily focuses on simpler instructions and does not encompass safety evaluations or complex tasks, and its evalua-tion may correlate win rates with response lengths. These tools represent significant advancements in LLM evaluation and development, enabling more accessible and diverse research. Considering our budget, we only run the evaluation on 5% settings. 

B.3 Open LLM Leaderboard 

The Huggingface Open LLM Leaderboard, incor-porating the evaluation method from the Eval Har-ness (Gao et al., 2021), serves as a comprehen-sive framework for evaluating generative language model capabilities. It focuses on four critical benchmarks: ARC (Clark et al., 2018), HellaSwag (Zellers et al., 2019), MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2021), and TruthfulQA (Lin et al., 2022). These benchmarks test the models on various aspects, such as reasoning, common-sense understanding, and factual accuracy. The leaderboard offers an effective platform for comparing different LLMs, providing valuable insights into their performance across these diverse and challenging tasks 14270 C Prompt for Evaluation 

The detailed pair-wise comparison prompt for the pair-wise comparison is in Figure 4. Prompt for Performance Evaluation 

System Prompt 

You are a helpful and precise assistant for checking the quality of the answer. 

User Prompt 

[Question] 

Question 

[The Start of Assistant 2’s Answer] 

Answer 2 

[The End of Assistant 2’s Answer] [The Start of Assistant 2’s Answer] 

Answer 2 

[The End of Assistant 2’s Answer] We would like to request your feedback on the per-formance of two AI assistants in response to the user question displayed above. Please rate the helpfulness, relevance, accuracy, level of details of their responses. Each assistant re-ceives an overall score on a scale of 1 to 10, where a higher score indicates better overall performance. Please first output a single line containing only two values indicating the scores for Assistant 1 and 2, respectively. The two scores are separated by a space. In the subsequent line, please provide a comprehensive explanation of your evaluation, avoiding any potential bias and ensuring that the order in which the responses were presented does not affect your judgment. 

> Figure 4: The prompt we used to request ChatGPT or GPT4 to evaluate the responses.

14271 D Why Weak-to-Strong Consistent? 

In this section, we provide the hypothesis on why this Weak-to-Strong consistency exists on two per-spectives. 

From the perspective of Perplexity : The con-sistency between IFD scores is built on the consis-tency of perplexities since it is the ratio between two kinds of perplexities. As for the reason why the rankings of perplexities are consistent between small and large language models, we hypothesize that both small and large language models are trained on similar corpus (almost all the existing data corpus), which means they’re exposed to the same underlying distribution of language. Even though larger models can capture more nuances and details due to their increased parameter count, both sizes of models are ultimately trying to ap-proximate the same underlying language structure. 

From the perspective of String Pattern : We also examined verb-noun pairs of the data sam-ples filtered by IFD scores on both weak (GPT-2) and strong (LLaMA2-7B) language models on the Alapca dataset and found a strong consistency in these verb-noun pairs. The results are listed in Table 6. From the table, we can find out that the language models tend to assign higher IFD scores to those data that require a lot of cre-ativity, thinking skills, and deep understanding 

while assigning lower IFD scores to those data that are more about following rules and need less creativity. This holds true for both small and large language models. 14272 LLaMA2-7B (Top 5% IFD) GPT2 (Top 5% IFD) Verb Noun Count Verb Noun Count 

write story 119 write story 117 generate list 104 generate story 84 generate story 89 create story 52 write essay 61 generate list 47 create list 44 write essay 39 write post 41 create list 29 write article 39 write paragraph 26 create story 36 write post 25 generate recipe 34 generate recipe 19 create recipe 31 give example 17 

LLaMA2-7B (Least 5% IFD) GPT2 (Least 5% IFD) Verb Noun Count Verb Noun Count 

rewrite sentence 140 rewrite sentence 124 edit sentence 56 edit sentence 74 classify sentence 51 classify sentence 30 change sentence 42 replace word 24 convert sentence 33 change sentence 23 arrange word 29 construct query 20 rearrange word 27 convert sentence 20 categorize sentence 26 arrange word 17 find word 24 find word 17 classify text 18 classify animal 16 

> Table 6: Verb-noun pairs of the top and least 5% IFD scores calculated by LLaMA2-7B and GPT2 on the Alpaca dataset.

14273