# Source: https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374
# Author: Mark Chen et al.
# Title: Evaluating Large Language Models Trained on Code
# Fetched via: search
# Date: 2026-04-09

# Computer Science > Machine Learning
...
[Submitted on 7 Jul 2021 (v1), last revised 14 Jul 2021 (this version, v2)]
…
Abstract:We introduce Codex, a GPT language model fine-tuned on publicly available code from GitHub, and study its Python code-writing capabilities.
A distinct production version of Codex powers GitHub Copilot.
On HumanEval, a new evaluation set we release to measure functional correctness for synthesizing programs from docstrings, our model solves 28.8% of the problems, while GPT-3 solves 0% and GPT-J solves 11.4%.
Furthermore, we find that repeated sampling from the model is a surprisingly effective strategy for producing working solutions to difficult prompts.
Using this method, we solve 70.2% of our problems with 100 samples per problem.
Careful investigation of our model reveals its limitations, including difficulty with docstrings describing long chains of operations and with binding operations to variables.

###### Abstract

We introduce Codex, a GPT language model fine-tuned on publicly available code from GitHub, and study its Python code-writing capabilities. A distinct production version of Codex powers GitHub Copilot. On HumanEval, a new evaluation set we release to measure functional correctness for synthesizing programs from docstrings, our model solves 28.8% of the problems, while GPT-3 solves 0% and GPT-J solves 11.4%.
Furthermore, we find that repeated sampling from the model is a surprisingly effective strategy for producing working solutions to difficult prompts. Using this method, we solve 70.2% of our problems with 100 samples per problem. Careful investigation of our model reveals its limitations, including difficulty with docstrings describing long chains of operations and with binding operations to variables. Finally, we discuss the potential broader impacts of deploying powerful code generation technologies, covering safety, security, and economics.

…

More recently, language models have also fueled progress towards the longstanding challenge of program synthesis (Simon, 1963; Manna & Waldinger, 1971), spurred by the presence of code in large datasets (Husain et al., 2019; Gao et al., 2020) and the resulting programming capabilities of language models trained on these datasets (Wang & Komatsuzaki, 2021).

…

In this work, we focus on the task of generating standalone Python functions from docstrings, and evaluate the correctness of code samples automatically through unit tests. This is in contrast to natural language generation, where samples are typically evaluated by heuristics or by human evaluators. To accurately benchmark our model, we create a dataset of 164 original programming problems with unit tests. These problems assess language comprehension, algorithms, and simple mathematics, with some comparable to simple software interview questions. We release this data along with an evaluation framework at https://www.github.com/openai/human-eval.
To solve a problem in our test set, we generate multiple samples from the models, and check if any of them pass the unit tests. With just a single sample, a 12B parameter Codex solves 28.8% of these problems, and a 300M parameter Codex solves 13.2% of these problems.
In contrast, the 6B parameter GPT-J (Wang & Komatsuzaki, 2021) achieves 11.4% on the same dataset, while all GPT models achieve near 0%. To improve our model’s performance at the task of function synthesis from docstrings, we fine-tune Codex on standalone, correctly implemented functions. The resulting model, Codex-S, solves 37.7% of problems with a single sample. Figure 2 showcases problems of varying difficulty in our dataset, along with correct model generated solutions.
Real-world programming tasks often involve iterations of approaches and bug fixes, which is approximated by generating many samples from our models and selecting one that passes all unit tests. Within 100 samples, Codex-S is able to generate at least one correct function for 77.5% of the problems. This result suggests that accurate code samples can be selected via heuristic ranking instead of fully evaluating each sample, the latter of which may not be possible or practical in deployment. Indeed, we find that the sample with highest mean log-probability passes unit tests for 44.5% of the problems.

…

## 2 Evaluation Framework

In this section, we discuss the details of our evaluation framework. We begin by defining the pass@k metric, and explain its advantages over standard match-based metrics. Next, we describe the dataset of hand-written problems, called “HumanEval,” which we created in order to benchmark our models. Finally, we discuss the sandbox environment we used to safely execute model-generated code.

### 2.1 Functional Correctness

Generative models for code are predominantly benchmarked by matching samples against a reference solution, where the match can be exact or fuzzy (as in BLEU score). However, recent work has surfaced deficiencies in match-based metrics for code. For instance, Ren et al. (2020) finds that BLEU has problems capturing semantic features specific to code, and suggests several semantic modifications to the score.
More fundamentally, match-based metrics are unable to account for the large and complex space of programs functionally equivalent to a reference solution. As a consequence, recent works in unsupervised code translation (Lachaux et al., 2020) and pseudocode-to-code translation (Kulal et al., 2019) have turned to functional correctness instead, where a sample is considered correct if it passes a set of unit tests. We argue that this metric should be applied to docstring-conditional code generation as well.

…

Kulal et al. (2019) evaluate functional correctness using the pass@k metric, where k code samples are generated per problem, a problem is considered solved if any sample passes the unit tests, and the total fraction of problems solved is reported. However, computing pass@k in this way can have high variance. Instead, to evaluate pass@k, we generate n\geq k samples per task (in this paper, we use n=200 and k\leq 100), count the number of correct samples c\leq n which pass unit tests, and calculate the unbiased estimator
| |pass@k|\displaystyle:=\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{\text{Problems}}\left[1-\frac{{\binom{n-c}{k}}}{\binom{n}{k}}\right]| |(1)|
|--|--|--|--|--|
Calculating this estimator directly results in very large numbers and numerical instability. In Figure 3, we include a numerically stable numpy implementation that simplifies the expression and evaluates the product term-by-term. One may be tempted to estimate pass@k with 1-(1-\hat{p})^{k} where \hat{p} is the empirical estimate of pass@1, but we show that it is biased in Appendix A.
Later, we provide evidence that BLEU score may not be a reliable indicator of functional correctness by showing that functionally inequivalent programs generated by our model (which are guaranteed to disagree with the reference solution on some input) often have higher BLEU scores than functionally equivalent ones.

### 2.2 HumanEval: Hand-Written Evaluation Set

We evaluate functional correctness on a set of 164 hand-written programming problems, which we call the HumanEval dataset. Each problem includes a function signature, docstring, body, and several unit tests, with an average of 7.7 tests per problem. It is important for these tasks to be hand-written, since our models are trained on a large fraction of GitHub, which already contains solutions to problems from a variety of sources. For example, there are more than ten public repositories containing solutions to Codeforces problems, which make up part of the recently proposed APPS dataset (Hendrycks et al., 2021).

…

## 3 Code Fine-Tuning

We fine-tune GPT models containing up to 12B parameters on code to produce Codex. In contrast with GPT, Codex displays non-trivial performance on the HumanEval dataset. In fact, Codex is able to solve the majority of the problems in HumanEval if we generate and evaluate 100 samples per problem, and pick one that passes unit tests. When limited to a budget of one evaluation per problem, producing multiple samples with Codex and choosing the one with the highest mean log-probability provides significant gains.

…

### 3.2 Methods

Since Codex is evaluated on natural language prompts, we hypothesized that it would be beneficial to fine-tune from the GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) model family, which already contains strong natural language representations. Surprisingly, we did not observe improvements when starting from a pre-trained language model, possibly because the fine-tuning dataset is so large. Nevertheless, models fine-tuned from GPT converge more quickly, so we apply this strategy for all subsequent experiments.
We train Codex using the same learning rate as the corresponding GPT model, with a 175 step linear warmup and cosine learning rate decay. We train for a total of 100 billion tokens, using the Adam optimizer with \beta_{1}=0.9, \beta_{2}=0.95, \epsilon=10^{-8}, and a weight decay coefficient of 0.1.

…

To compute pass@k, we assemble each HumanEval problem into a prompt consisting of a header, a signature, and a docstring, which is illustrated in Figure 2. We sample tokens from Codex until we encounter one of the following stop sequences: ‘\nclass’, ‘\ndef’, ‘\n#’, ‘\nif’, or ‘\nprint’, since the model will continue generating additional functions or statements otherwise. We use nucleus sampling (Holtzman et al., 2020) with top p=0.95 for all sampling evaluation in this work.

### 3.3 Results

In Figure 4, we plot test loss on a held-out validation set against Codex model size. We find that just as language model test loss follows a power law in model size (Kaplan et al., 2020), test loss after code fine-tuning follows a similar power law with functional form (\frac{N}{5.92\times 10^{7}})^{-0.13} where N is the number of non-embedding parameters in the model.
When evaluating pass@k, it is important to optimize sampling temperature for the particular value of k. In Figure 5, we plot pass@k against the number of samples k and the sampling temperature. We find that higher temperatures are optimal for larger k, because the resulting set of samples has higher diversity, and the metric rewards only whether the model generates any correct solution.
In particular, for a 679M parameter model, the optimal temperature for pass@1 is T^{*}=0.2 and the optimal temperature for pass@100 is T^{*}=0.8. With these temperatures, we find that pass@1 and pass@100 scale smoothly as a function of model size (Figure 6).

…

Finally, we compute BLEU scores for all Codex-12B HumanEval samples (at temperature 0.8) against their reference solutions. For each problem, when we plot the distributions of BLEU scores for correct and incorrect solutions, we notice significant overlap (Figure 8). Since an incorrect solution is guaranteed to be functionally inequivalent to the reference solution, we conclude that improvements in BLEU score may not indicate improved rates of functional correctness in practice.

…

### 3.5 Results on the APPS Dataset

Recently, Hendrycks et al. (2021) introduced the APPS dataset to measure the coding challenge competence of language models. The APPS dataset consists of 5000 training and 5000 test examples of coding problems, each with a set of unit tests and, for the training data, a set of correct solutions. Most of the APPS tests problems are not formulated as single-function synthesis tasks, but rather as full-program synthesis, reading input from stdin and printing output to stdout, in contrast to the main Codex training data.
In the paper that introduces APPS, the authors benchmark a few language models and report two metrics: the percentage of problems where the model finds a correct solution (called the “strict accuracy”) and the percentage of unit tests passed, even if the solution is incorrect. The latter measure is reported only so as to reduce variance of the measurements, because the results on the first metric were so low.

…

- •

  In coding competitions and in the APPS datasets, tasks are provided with 3 input/output examples included in the task description. We utilize this by sampling 1000 solutions from the model and filtering out only those that pass these 3 unit tests (if such solutions exist). We then calculate pass rates in this filtered set, and call it filtered pass@k. Results without filtering are presented as raw pass@k.
- •

  It is often the case both in coding competitions and in the results from Codex that a correct solution is found, but it is not algorithmically efficient enough to be considered passing. While this is not acceptable in the competitions, we also report the number of solutions that Codex produces that do not fail on any unit test, but that do time-out on some of them. We use a timeout of 3 seconds in our evaluation.

…

Consistent with our earlier findings, there are large benefits from generating and evaluating as many as 1000 samples per task, though for more difficult problems, solutions are often not efficient enough to pass the time limits. Finally, evaluating the first sample which passes the 3 public unit tests for each problem yields higher performance than raw pass@100 samples.

…

In order to adapt Codex to the distribution of the task of interest, we construct a set of training problems from correctly implemented standalone functions, and use them for additional supervised fine-tuning. We describe two approaches for collecting these examples: from competitive programming websites and from repositories with continuous integration. We call the supervised fine-tuned models Codex-S, and show that they produce consistent gains across model size.

### 4.1 Problems from Competitive Programming

Programming contest and interview preparation websites use hidden unit tests to automatically judge the functional correctness of submissions. These problems are self-contained, come with well-written problem statements, and generally have excellent test coverage. Additionally, these problems test algorithmic reasoning over a broad range of core skills and difficulties.
We collected problem statements, function signatures, and solutions from several popular programming contest and interview preparation websites. We then assembled these into programming tasks similar to HumanEval, using the problem description as the docstring. Since complete test suites are often hidden, we created unit tests from examples found in the problem statements, or extracted additional test cases through submitting incorrect solutions. In total, we curated 10,000 problems in this way.

…

Since our tracing methodology produced inputs and outputs for all invoked functions, even builtin and library calls imported by the project were turned into problems. For this reason, functions from tracing tended to be the building blocks of command-line utilities. To excel at these tasks, the model does not need to know advanced algorithms and data structures. Rather, it needs to be able to follow instructions to implement the functionality specified in the docstring. Thus, tracing complements the puzzle nature of coding competition problems and broadens the distribution of tasks.

### 4.3 Filtering Problems

In the previous sections, we presented two methods we used to automatically create training problems. However, it is unclear how to control for quality. Some prompts underspecify the function that is implemented, in which case a perfectly valid solution may be wrongly penalized by the unit test. Some problems are stateful, and subsequent executions can result in different outcomes.
To address these issues, we use Codex-12B to generate 100 samples per curated problem. If no samples pass the unit tests, we consider the task to be either ambiguous or too difficult, and filter it out. We reran this verification several times to remove stateful or non-deterministic problems.

### 4.4 Methods

We fine-tune Codex on these training problems to produce a set of “supervised fine-tuned” models, which we call Codex-S. To produce examples from training problems, we assemble the problems into the format shown in Figure 2. If there are prompts of varying length in a batch, we left-pad shorter prompts to the length of the longest prompt, so that the first tokens in the reference solutions line up in context.
We train to minimize negative log-likelihood of the reference solution, and mask out loss for any tokens in the prompt. We train using a learning rate 1/10 as large as used for fine-tuning Codex, but adhere to the same learning rate schedule, and train until validation loss plateaus (less than 10B tokens).

### 4.5 Results

As with Codex, we first compute the optimal temperature for evaluating pass@k for 1\leq k\leq 100. We find that Codex-S prefers slightly higher temperatures for all k>1, which possibly reflects the fact that Codex-S captures a narrower distribution than Codex. We use T^{*}=0 for computing pass@1 and T^{*}=1 for computing pass@100.
Next, we compare Codex-S against Codex on pass@1 and pass@100. Codex-S outperforms the corresponding Codex by an average margin of 6.5 percentage points on pass@1 and by a larger average margin of 15.1 percentage points on pass@100 across model size.

…

Specifically, for each training problem, we assemble a training example by concatenating the function signature, the reference solution, and then the docstring. Just as we train Codex-S by minimizing negative log-likelihood of the reference solution, we train the docstring generating models Codex-D by minimizing negative log-likelihood of the docstring.

…

Therefore, we developed a set of qualitative metrics for measuring the capabilities of code generating models while controlling for the complexity and abstraction level of the specifications (Appendix D). Applying this framework, we find that Codex can recommend syntactically incorrect or undefined code, and can invoke functions, variables, and attributes that are undefined or outside the scope of the codebase. Moreover, Codex struggles to parse through increasingly long and higher-level or system-level specifications.
To concretely illustrate model performance degradation as docstring length increases, we create a dataset of synthetic problems assembled from 13 basic building blocks, each of which modifies an input string in a deterministic way. Example building blocks are “convert the string to lowercase” or “remove every third character from the string” (the full list is described in Appendix C).

…

### 7.2 Misalignment

As with other large language models trained on a next-token prediction objective, Codex will generate code that is as similar as possible to its training distribution. One consequence of this is that such models may do things that are unhelpful for the user, despite having the capability to be more helpful (see Figure 12). For example, if the user has some subtle mistakes in their code, Codex may “deliberately” suggest code that superficially appears good but is incorrect.

…

It is important to study misalignment because it is a problem that is likely to become worse, not better, as the capabilities of our systems increase. For example, the model size scaling trend for the example in Figure 12 indicates that misalignment would likely persist and even get worse if data, parameters, and training time were scaled up.

…

Our preliminary research also finds that Codex models rarely generate code that is identical to the contents of training data. Such occurrences were < 0.1% in a study examining the frequency of code generations that appear to match code snippets in the training data (Ziegler, 2021). In these rare instances, the generated code consisted of common expressions or conventions within the programming language that appeared over and over again in the training data. We find that, to the extent the generated code appears identical to the training data, it is due to the predictive weightings in the model rather than retention and copying of specific code.

…

We used functional correctness to benchmark our models, and observed improvements on this metric with more sampling. SPoC (Kulal et al., 2019) considered the problem of producing functionally correct code from pseudocode with a fixed budget of compilations, which is similar to our pass@k metric. TransCoder (Lachaux et al., 2020) trained a system to translate between programming languages in an unsupervised manner, and also observed that functional correctness better captured the capabilities of their model than BLEU score.

# Evaluating Large Language Models Trained on Code2021 · ArXiv: 2107.03374arXiv.org · 5,702 Citations
### TLDR
It is found that repeated sampling from the GPT language model is a surprisingly effective strategy for producing working solutions to difficult prompts, and the potential broader impacts of deploying powerful code generation technologies, covering safety, security, and economics are discussed.
### Abstract
We introduce Codex, a GPT language model fine-tuned on publicly available code from GitHub, and study its Python code-writing capabilities.
A distinct production version of Codex powers GitHub Copilot.
On HumanEval, a new evaluation set we release to measure functional correctness for synthesizing programs from docstrings, our model solves 28.8% of the problems, while GPT-3 solves 0% and GPT-J solves 11.4%.
Furthermore, we find that repeated sampling from the model is a surprisingly effective strategy for producing working solutions to difficult prompts.
Using this method, we solve 70.2% of our problems with 100 samples per problem.
Careful investigation of our model reveals its limitations, including difficulty with docstrings describing long chains of operations and with binding operations to variables.
Finally, we discuss the potential broader impacts of deploying powerful code generation technologies, covering safety, security, and economics.

@misc{chen_evaluating_2021, title = {Evaluating {Large} {Language} {Models} {Trained} on {Code}}, url = {http://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374}, abstract = {We introduce Codex, a GPT language model fine-tuned on publicly available code from GitHub, and study its Python code-writing capabilities.
A distinct production version of Codex powers GitHub Copilot.
On HumanEval, a new evaluation set we release to measure functional correctness for synthesizing programs from docstrings, our model solves 28.8\% of the problems, while GPT-3 solves 0\% and GPT-J solves 11.4\%.
Furthermore, we find that repeated sampling from the model is a surprisingly effective strategy for producing working solutions to difficult prompts.
Using this method, we solve 70.2\% of our problems with 100 samples per problem.
Careful investigation of our model reveals its limitations, including difficulty with docstrings describing long chains of operations and with binding operations to variables.
Finally, we discuss the potential broader impacts of deploying powerful code generation technologies, covering safety, security, and economics.}, urldate = {2022-09-21}, publisher = {arXiv}, author = {Chen, Mark and Tworek, Jerry and Jun, Heewoo and Yuan, Qiming
…
, Peter and McGrew, Bob and Amodei, Dario and McCandlish, Sam and Sutskever, Ilya and Zaremba, Wojciech}, month = jul, year = {2021}, doi = {10.48550/arXiv.2107.03374}, keywords = {\#nosource, Computer Science - Machine Learning}, }

## Abstract
We introduce Codex, a GPT language model fine-tuned on publicly available code from GitHub, and study its Python code-writing capabilities.
A distinct production version of Codex powers GitHub Copilot.
On HumanEval, a new evaluation set we release to measure functional correctness for synthesizing programs from docstrings, our model solves 28.8% of the problems, while GPT-3 solves 0% and GPT-J solves 11.4%.
Furthermore, we find that repeated sampling from the model is a surprisingly effective strategy for producing working solutions to difficult prompts.
Using this method, we solve 70.2% of our problems with 100 samples per problem.
Careful investigation of our model reveals its limitations, including difficulty with docstrings describing long chains of operations and with binding operations to variables.
Finally, we discuss the potential broader impacts of deploying powerful code generation technologies, covering safety, security, and economics.