# Source: https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.04761
# Author: Timo Schick et al.
# Title: Language Models Can Teach Themselves to Use Tools
# Fetched via: search
# Date: 2026-04-09

# Computer Science > Computation and Language
**arXiv:2302.04761** (cs)
[Submitted on 9 Feb 2023]
…
Abstract:Language models (LMs) exhibit remarkable abilities to solve new tasks from just a few examples or textual instructions, especially at scale.
They also, paradoxically, struggle with basic functionality, such as arithmetic or factual lookup, where much simpler and smaller models excel.
In this paper, we show that LMs can teach themselves to use external tools via simple APIs and achieve the best of both worlds.
We introduce Toolformer, a model trained to decide which APIs to call, when to call them, what arguments to pass, and how to best incorporate the results into future token prediction.
This is done in a self-supervised way, requiring nothing more than a handful of demonstrations for each API.
We incorporate a range of tools, including a calculator, a Q\&A system, two different search engines, a translation system, and a calendar.
Toolformer achieves substantially improved zero-shot performance across a variety of downstream tasks, often competitive with much larger models, without sacrificing its core language modeling abilities.

###### Abstract
Language models (LMs) exhibit remarkable abilities to solve new tasks from just a few examples or textual instructions, especially at scale. They also, paradoxically, struggle with basic functionality, such as arithmetic or factual lookup, where much simpler and smaller models excel. In this paper, we show that LMs can teach themselves to *use external tools* via simple APIs and achieve the best of both worlds.
We introduce *Toolformer*, a model trained to decide which APIs to call, when to call them, what arguments to pass, and how to best incorporate the results into future token prediction. This is done in a self-supervised way, requiring nothing more than a handful of demonstrations for each API. We incorporate a range of tools, including a calculator, a Q&A system, a search engine, a translation system, and a calendar. Toolformer achieves substantially improved zero-shot performance across a variety of downstream tasks, often competitive with much larger models, without sacrificing its core language modeling abilities.

## 1 Introduction
Large language models achieve impressive zero- and few-shot results on a variety of natural language processing tasks (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022, i.a.) and show several emergent capabilities (Wei et al., 2022). However, all of these models have several inherent limitations that can at best be partially addressed by further scaling.
These limitations include an inability to access up-to-date information on recent events (Komeili et al., 2022) and the related tendency to hallucinate facts (Maynez et al., 2020; Ji et al., 2022), difficulties in understanding low-resource languages (Lin et al., 2021), a lack of mathematical skills to perform precise calculations (Patel et al., 2021) and an unawareness of the progression of time (Dhingra et al., 2022).
A simple way to overcome these limitations of today’s language models is to give them the ability to *use external tools* such as search engines, calculators, or calendars. However, existing approaches either rely on large amounts of human annotations (Komeili et al., 2022; Thoppilan et al., 2022) or limit tool use to task-specific settings only (e.g., Gao et al., 2022; Parisi et al., 2022), hindering a more widespread adoption of tool use in LMs.
Therefore, we propose *Toolformer*, a model that learns to use tools in a novel way, which fulfills the following desiderata:

- •

  The use of tools should be learned in a self-supervised way without requiring large amounts of *human annotations*. This is important not only because of the costs associated with such annotations, but also because what humans find useful may be different from what a model finds useful.
- •

  The LM should not lose any of its *generality* and should be able to decide for itself *when* and *how* to use which tool. In contrast to existing approaches, this enables a much more comprehensive use of tools that is not tied to specific tasks.
Our approach for achieving these goals is based on the recent idea of using large LMs with *in-context learning* (Brown et al., 2020) to generate entire datasets from scratch (Schick and
Schütze, 2021b; Honovich et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022): Given just a handful of human-written examples of how an API can be used, we let a LM annotate a huge language modeling dataset with potential API calls.
We then use a self-supervised loss to determine which of these API calls actually help the model in predicting future tokens. Finally, we finetune the LM itself on the API calls that it considers useful. As illustrated in Figure 1, through this simple approach, LMs can learn to control a variety of tools, and to choose for themselves which tool to use when and how.
As our approach is agnostic of the dataset being used, we can apply it to the exact same dataset that was used to pretrain a model in the first place. This ensures that the model does not lose any of its generality and language modeling abilities.
We conduct experiments on a variety of different downstream tasks, demonstrating that after learning to use tools, Toolformer, which is based on a pretrained GPT-J model (Wang and Komatsuzaki, 2021) with 6.7B parameters, achieves much stronger zero-shot results, clearly outperforming a much larger GPT-3 model (Brown et al., 2020) and several other baselines on various tasks.

## 2 Approach

Our aim is to equip a language model M with the ability to use different tools by means of API calls. We require that inputs and outputs for each API can be represented as text sequences. This allows seamless insertion of API calls into any given text, using special tokens to mark the start and end of each such call.

…

Given a dataset \mathcal{C}=\{\mathbf{x}^{1},\ldots,\mathbf{x}^{|\mathcal{C}|}\} of plain texts, we first convert this dataset into a dataset \mathcal{C}^{*} augmented with API calls. This is done in three steps, illustrated in Figure 2: First, we exploit the in-context learning ability of M to sample a large number of potential API calls.
We then execute these API calls and finally check whether the obtained responses are helpful for predicting future tokens; this is used as a filtering criterion. After filtering, we merge API calls for different tools, resulting in the augmented dataset \mathcal{C}^{*}, and finetune M itself on this dataset. Each of these steps is described in more detail below.

##### Sampling API Calls
For each API, we write a prompt P(\mathbf{x}) that encourages the LM to annotate an example \mathbf{x}=x_{1},\ldots,x_{n} with API calls. An example of such a prompt for a question answering tool is shown in Figure 3; all prompts used are shown in Appendix A.2.

…

| |L_{i}(\mathbf{z})=-\sum_{j=i}^{n}w_{j-i}\cdot\log{p_{M}(x_{j}\mid\mathbf{z},x_{1:j-1})}| |
|--|--|--|

be the weighted cross entropy loss for M over the tokens x_{i},\ldots,x_{n} if the model is prefixed with \mathbf{z}. We compare two different instantiations of this loss:
| |\displaystyle L_{i}^{+}|\displaystyle=L_{i}(\text{e}(c_{i},r_{i}))| |
|--|--|--|--|
| |\displaystyle L_{i}^{-}|\displaystyle=\min\left(L_{i}(\varepsilon),L_{i}(\text{e}(c_{i},\varepsilon))\right)| |

…

| |L_{i}^{-}-L_{i}^{+}\geq\tau_{f}| |
|--|--|--|

holds, i.e., adding the API call and its result *reduces* the loss by at least \tau_{f}, compared to not doing any API call or obtaining no result from it.

##### Model Finetuning
After sampling and filtering calls for all APIs, we finally merge the remaining API calls and interleave them with the original inputs. That is, for an input text \mathbf{x}=x_{1},\ldots,x_{n} with a corresponding API call and result (c_{i},r_{i}) at position i, we construct the new sequence \mathbf{x}^{*}=x_{1:{i-1}},\text{e}(c_{i},r_{i}),x_{i:n}; we proceed analogously for texts with multiple API calls.
Doing this for all \mathbf{x}\in\mathcal{C} results in the new dataset \mathcal{C}^{*} augmented with API calls. We use this new dataset to finetune M, using a standard language modeling objective. Crucially, apart from inserted API calls the augmented dataset \mathcal{C}^{*} contains the exact same texts as \mathcal{C}, the original dataset.
As a consequence, finetuning M on \mathcal{C}^{*} exposes it to the same content as finetuning on \mathcal{C}. Moreover, as API calls are inserted in exactly those positions and with exactly those inputs that help M predict future tokens, finetuning on \mathcal{C}^{*} enables the language model to decide when and how to use which tool, based purely on its own feedback.

…

## 3 Tools
We explore a variety of tools to address different shortcomings of regular LMs. The only constraints we impose on these tools is that (i) both their inputs and outputs can be represented as text sequences, and (ii) we can obtain a few demonstrations of their intended use. Concretely, we explore the following five tools: a question answering system, a Wikipedia search engine, a calculator, a calendar, and a machine translation system. Some examples of potential calls and return strings for the APIs associated with each of these tools are shown in Table 1. We briefly discuss all tools below; further details can be found in Appendix A.

…

##### Machine Translation System

Our fourth tool is a machine translation system based on a LM that can translate a phrase from any language into English. More concretely, we use the 600M parameter NLLB (Costa-jussà et al., 2022) as our multilingual machine translation model that works for 200 languages (including low-resource ones). The source language is automatically detected using the fastText classifier (Joulin et al., 2016), while the target language is always set to English.

…

## 4 Experiments
We investigate whether our approach enables a model to use tools without any further supervision and to decide for itself when and how to call which of the available tools. To test this, we select a variety of downstream tasks where we assume at least one of the considered tools to be useful, and evaluate performance in zero-shot settings (Section 4.2).
Beyond that, we also ensure that our approach does not hurt the model’s core language modeling abilities; we verify this by looking at perplexity on two language modeling datasets (Section 4.3). Finally, we investigate how the ability to learn using tools is affected by model size (Section 4.4).

### 4.1 Experimental Setup
##### Dataset Generation
Throughout all of our experiments, we use a subset of CCNet (Wenzek et al., 2020) as our language modeling dataset \mathcal{C} and GPT-J (Wang and Komatsuzaki, 2021) as our language model M. To reduce the computational cost of annotating \mathcal{C} with API calls, we define heuristics for some APIs to get a subset of \mathcal{C} for which API calls are more likely to be helpful than for an average text.

…

^4^^4^4While this filtering alters the distribution of training examples, we assume that the remaining examples are close enough to the original distribution so that M’s language modeling abilities remain unaffected. This assumption is empirically validated in Section 4.3. For the weighting function, we use

| |w_{t}=\frac{\tilde{w}_{t}}{\sum_{s\in\mathbb{N}}\tilde{w}_{s}}\text{ with }\tilde{w}_{t}=\max(0,1-0.2\cdot t)| |
|--|--|--|

to make sure that API calls happen close to where the information provided by the API is actually helpful for the model. The thresholds \tau_{s} and \tau_{f} are chosen individually for each tool to ensure a sufficiently larger number of examples; see Appendix A for details. Table 2 shows relevant statistics of our final dataset augmented with API calls.

##### Model Finetuning

We finetune M on \mathcal{C}^{*} using a batch size of 128 and a learning rate of 1\cdot 10^{-5} with linear warmup for the first 10% of training. Details of our finetuning procedure are given in Appendix B.

…

### 4.2 Downstream Tasks
We evaluate all models on a variety of downstream tasks. In all cases, we consider a prompted zero-shot setup – i.e., models are instructed to solve each task in natural language, but we do not provide any in-context examples. This is in contrast to prior work on tool use (e.g., Gao et al., 2022; Parisi et al., 2022), where models are provided with dataset-specific examples of how a tool can be used to solve a concrete task.
We choose the more challenging zero-shot setup as we are interested in seeing whether Toolformer works in precisely those cases where a user does not specify in advance which tools should be used in which way for solving a specific problem.

…

#### 4.2.1 LAMA
We evaluate our models on the SQuAD, Google-RE and T-REx subsets of the LAMA benchmark (Petroni et al., 2019). For each of these subsets, the task is to complete a short statement with a missing fact (e.g., a date or a place). As LAMA was originally designed to evaluate *masked* language models (e.g., Devlin et al., 2019), we filter out examples where the mask token is not the final token, so that the remaining examples can be processed in a left-to-right fashion.
To account for different tokenizations and added complexity from not informing the model that a single word is required, we use a slightly more lenient evaluation criterion than exact match and simply check whether the correct word is within the first five words predicted by the model. As LAMA is based on statements obtained directly from Wikipedia, we prevent Toolformer from using the Wikipedia Search API to avoid giving it an unfair advantage.
Results for all models can be seen in Table 3. All GPT-J models without tool use achieve similar performance. Crucially, Toolformer clearly outperforms these baseline models, improving upon the best baseline by 11.7, 5.2 and 18.6 points, respectively. It also clearly outperforms OPT (66B) and GPT-3 (175B), despite both models being much larger.
This is achieved because the model independently decides to ask the question answering tool for the required information in almost all cases (98.1%); for only very few examples, it uses a different tool (0.7%) or no tool at all (1.2%).

#### 4.2.2 Math Datasets
We test mathematical reasoning abilities on ASDiv (Miao et al., 2020), SVAMP (Patel et al., 2021) and the MAWPS benchmark (Koncel-Kedziorski et al., 2016). We again account for the fact that we test all models in a zero-shot setup by using a more lenient evaluation criterion: As the required output is always a number, we simply check for the first number predicted by the model.
^7^^7^7An exception to this is if the model’s prediction contains an equation (e.g., “The correct answer is 5+3=8”), in which case we consider the first number after the “=” sign to be its prediction.
Table 4 shows results for all benchmarks. While GPT-J and GPT-J + CC perform about the same, Toolformer achieves stronger results even when API calls are disabled. We surmise that this is because the model is finetuned on many examples of API calls and their results, improving its own mathematical capabilities. Nonetheless, allowing the model to make API calls more than doubles performance for all tasks, and also clearly outperforms the much larger OPT and GPT-3 models. This is because across all benchmarks, for 97.9% of all examples the model decides to ask the calculator tool for help.

#### 4.2.3 Question Answering
We look at Web Questions (Berant et al., 2013), Natural Questions (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019) and TriviaQA (Joshi et al., 2017), the three question answering datasets considered by Brown et al. (2020). For evaluation, we check whether the first 20 words predicted by a model contain the correct answer instead of requiring an exact match. For Toolformer, we disable the question answering tool as this would make solving the tasks trivial, especially given that the underlying QA system was finetuned on Natural Questions.

…

#### 4.2.4 Multilingual Question Answering
We evaluate Toolformer and all baseline models on MLQA (Lewis et al., 2019), a multilingual question-answering benchmark. A context paragraph for each question is provided in English, while the question can be in Arabic, German, Spanish, Hindi, Vietnamese, or Simplified Chinese. In order to solve the task, the model needs to be able to understand both the paragraph and the question, so it may benefit from translating the question into English. Our evaluation metric is the percentage of times the model’s generation, capped at 10 words, contains the correct answer.

…

As an upper bound, we also evaluate GPT-J and GPT-3 on a variant of MLQA where both the context and the question are provided in English. In this setup, GPT-3 performs better than all other models, supporting our hypothesis that its subpar performance on MLQA is due to the multilingual aspect of the task.

…

### 4.3 Language Modeling
In addition to verifying improved performance on various downstream tasks, we also want to ensure that language modeling performance of Toolformer does not degrade through our finetuning with API calls. To this end, we evaluate our models on two language modeling datasets: WikiText (Merity et al., 2017) and a subset of 10,000 randomly selected documents from CCNet (Wenzek et al., 2020) that were not used during training.

…

### 4.4 Scaling Laws
We investigate how the ability to ask external tools for help affects performance as we vary the size of our LM. To this end, we apply our approach not just to GPT-J, but also to four smaller models from the GPT-2 family (Radford et al., 2019), with 124M, 355M, 775M and 1.6B parameters, respectively. We do so using only a subset of three tools: the question answering system, the calculator, and the Wikipedia search engine. Apart from this, we follow the experimental setup described in Section 4.1.
Figure 4 shows that the ability to leverage the provided tools only emerges at around 775M parameters: smaller models achieve similar performance both with and without tools. An exception to this is the Wikipedia search engine used mostly for QA benchmarks; we hypothesize that this is because the API is comparably easy to use. While models become better at solving tasks *without* API calls as they grow in size, their ability to make good use of the provided API improves at the same time. As a consequence, there remains a large gap between predictions with and without API calls even for our biggest model.

Abstract
Language models (LMs) exhibit remarkable abilities to solve new tasks from just a
few examples or textual instructions, especially at scale. They also, paradoxically,
struggle with basic functionality, such as arithmetic or factual lookup, where much
simpler and smaller specialized models excel. In this paper, we show that LMs
can teach themselves to use external tools via simple APIs and achieve the best of
both worlds. We introduce Toolformer, a model trained to decide which APIs to
call, when to call them, what arguments to pass, and how to best incorporate the
results into future token prediction. This is done in a self-supervised way, requiring
nothing more than a handful of demonstrations for each API. We incorporate a
range of tools, including a calculator, a Q&A system, a search engine, a translation
system, and a calendar. Toolformer achieves substantially improved zero-shot
performance across a variety of downstream tasks, often competitive with much
larger models, without sacrificing its core language modeling abilities.
1
Introduction
Large language models achieve impressive zero and few-shot results on a variety of natural language
processing tasks (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022, i.a.). However, these models have
several inherent limitations that can at best be partially addressed by further scaling. These limitations
include an inability to access up-to-date information on recent events (Komeili et al., 2022) and the
related tendency to hallucinate facts (Maynez et al., 2020; Ji et al., 2022), difficulties in understanding
low-resource languages (Lin et al., 2021), a lack of mathematical skills to perform precise calculations
(Patel et al., 2021) and an unawareness of the progression of time (Dhingra et al., 2022).
A simple way to overcome the limitations of today’s language models is to give them the ability to
use external tools such as search engines, calculators, or calendars. However, existing approaches
either rely on large amounts of human annotations (Komeili et al., 2022; Thoppilan et al., 2022) or
limit tool use to task-specific settings only (e.g., Gao et al., 2022; Parisi et al., 2022), hindering a
more widespread adoption of tool use in LMs. Therefore, we propose Toolformer, a model that learns
to use tools in a novel way, which fulfills the following desiderata:
• Tool use should be learned in a self-supervised way without large amounts of human
annotations. This is important not only because of the costs associated with such annotations,
but also because what humans find useful may be different from what a model finds useful.
• The LM should not lose any of its generality and should be able to decide for itself when
and how to use which tool. In contrast to existing approaches, this enables a much more
comprehensive use of tools that is not tied to specific tasks.
Our approach for achieving these goals is based on the recent idea of using large LMs with in-context
learning (Brown et al., 2020) to generate entire datasets from scratch (Schick and Schütze, 2021b;
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

…

requires legislative bodies, like city councils, to hold their meetings open to the public.
Figure 1: Exemplary predictions of Toolformer. The model autonomously decides to call different
APIs (from top to bottom: a question answering system, a calculator, a machine translation system,
and a Wikipedia search engine) to obtain information that is useful for completing a piece of text.

…

1 
Sample API Calls
2 
Execute API Calls
3 
Filter API Calls
LM Dataset
LM Dataset 
with API Calls
Figure 2: Key steps in our approach, illustrated for a question answering tool: Given an input text x,
we first sample a position i and corresponding API call candidates c1
i , c2
i , . . . , ck
i . We then execute
these API calls and filter out all calls which do not reduce the loss Li over the next tokens. All
remaining API calls are interleaved with the original text, resulting in a new text x∗.
Honovich et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022): Given just a handful of human-written examples of how an
API can be used, we let a LM annotate a huge language modeling dataset with potential API calls.
We then use a self-supervised loss to determine which of these API calls actually help the model in
predicting future tokens. Finally, we finetune the LM itself on the API calls that it considers useful.
As illustrated in Figure 1, through this simple approach, LMs can learn to control a variety of tools,
and to choose for themselves which tool to use when and how.
As our approach is agnostic of the dataset being used, we can apply it to the exact same dataset
that was used to pretrain a model in the first place. This ensures that the model does not lose any
of its generality and language modeling abilities. We conduct experiments on a variety of different
downstream tasks, demonstrating that after learning to use tools, Toolformer, which is based on
a pretrained GPT-J model (Wang and Komatsuzaki, 2021) with 6.7B parameters, achieves much
stronger zero-shot results, clearly outperforming a much larger GPT-3 model (Brown et al., 2020)
and several other baselines on various tasks.
2
Approach
Our aim is to equip a language model M with the ability to use different tools through API calls. We
represent API calls as tuples c = (ac, ic) where ac is the name of the API and ic is the corresponding

…

Given a dataset C = {x1, . . . , x|C|} of plain texts, we first convert this dataset into a dataset C∗
augmented with API calls. This is done in three steps, illustrated in Figure 2: First, we exploit the
in-context learning ability of M to sample a large number of API calls. We then execute them and

…

�
j=i
wj−i · log pM(xj | z, x1:j−1)
be the weighted cross entropy loss for M over the tokens xi, . . . , xn if the model is prefixed with
some text sequence z. We compare two different instantiations of this loss:

…

Our first tool is a question answering system based on another LM that
can answer simple factoid questions. Specifically, we use Atlas (Izacard et al., 2022), a retrieval-
augmented LM finetuned on Natural Questions (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019).
Calculator
As a second tool, we use a calculator that can perform simple numeric calculations; we

…

can translate a phrase from any language into English. More concretely, we use the 600M parameter
NLLB (Costa-jussà et al., 2022) as our multilingual machine translation model that works for 200
languages (including low-resource ones). The source language is automatically detected using the
fastText classifier (Joulin et al., 2016), while the target language is always set to English.
Calendar
Our final tool is a calendar API that, when queried, returns the current date without
taking any input. This provides temporal context for predictions that require some awareness of time.
4

…

5,135
Wikipedia Search
207,241
60,974
13,944
Calculator
3,680
994
138
Calendar
61,811
20,587
3,007
Machine Translation
3,156
1,034
229
4
Experiments
We investigate whether our approach enables a LM to use tools without any further supervision and
to decide for itself when and how to call which tool. To test this, we select a variety of downstream
tasks where we assume at least one of the considered tools to be useful, and evaluate performance
in zero-shot settings (Section 4.2). Beyond that, we also ensure that our approach does not hurt the
model’s core LM abilities; we verify this by looking at perplexity on two language modeling datasets
(Section 4.3). Finally, we investigate how tool use is affected by model size (Section 4.4).
4.1
Experimental Setup
We use a subset of CCNet (Wenzek et al., 2020) as our dataset C and GPT-J (Wang and Komatsuzaki,

…

sufficient number of examples; see Appendix A for details. Table 2 shows relevant statistics of our
final dataset augmented with API calls. We finetune M on C∗using a batch size of 128 and a learning
rate of 1 · 10−5 with linear warmup for the first 10% of training. Finetuning details are given in
Appendix B. In our experiments, we mainly compare GPT-J and the following models:
• GPT-J + CC: GPT-J finetuned on C, our subset of CCNet without any API calls.
• Toolformer: GPT-J finetuned on C∗, our subset of CCNet augmented with API calls.

…

is in contrast to prior work on tool use (e.g., Gao et al., 2022; Parisi et al., 2022), where models are
provided with dataset-specific examples of how a tool can be used to solve a concrete task. We choose
this more challenging setup as we are interested in seeing whether Toolformer works in precisely
those cases where a user does not specify in advance which tools should be used in which way.
3While this filtering alters the distribution of training examples, we assume that the remaining examples
are close enough to the original distribution so that M’s language modeling abilities remain unaffected. This
assumption is empirically validated in Section 4.3.
5
Table 3: Results on subsets of LAMA and various benchmarks requiring mathematical reasoning. For
LAMA, Toolformer uses the question answering tool for most examples, clearly outperforming all
baselines of the same size and achieving results competitive with GPT-3. For the math benchmarks,
Toolformer makes extensive use of the calculator tool, clearly outperforming OPT and GPT-3. Best

…

use a slightly more lenient evaluation criterion than exact match and simply check whether the correct
word is within the first five words predicted by the model. As LAMA is based on statements obtained
directly from Wikipedia, we prevent Toolformer from using the Wikipedia Search API to avoid
giving it an unfair advantage. As shown in Table 3 (left), all GPT-J models without tool use achieve
similar performance. Crucially, Toolformer clearly outperforms these baseline models, improving
upon the best baseline by 11.7, 5.2 and 18.6 points, respectively. It also clearly outperforms OPT
(66B) and GPT-3 (175B), despite both models being much larger. This is achieved because the model
independently decides to ask the question answering tool for the required information in almost all
cases (98.1%); for only very few examples, it uses a different tool (0.7%) or no tool at all (1.2%).
Math Benchmarks
We test mathematical abilities on ASDiv (Miao et al., 2020), SVAMP (Patel
et al., 2021) and the MAWPS benchmark (Koncel-Kedziorski et al., 2016). We again account for
the fact that we test all models in a zero-shot setup by using a more lenient evaluation criterion:
As the required output is always a number, we simply check for the first number predicted by the
model.4 Results are shown in Table 3 (right). While GPT-J and GPT-J + CC perform about the same,
Toolformer achieves stronger results even without API calls. We surmise that this is because the
model is finetuned on many examples of API calls and their results, improving its own mathematical

…

We evaluate all models on MLQA (Lewis et al., 2019), a multilingual QA
benchmark. Context for each question is provided in English, while the question can be in Arabic,
German, Spanish, Hindi, Vietnamese, or Simplified Chinese. Our evaluation metric is the percentage
of times the model’s generation, capped at 10 words, contains the correct answer. Results are shown

…

DATESET, described in Appendix D, is generated through a series of templates, but populated using a
combination of random dates/durations (e.g., “What day of the week was it 30 days ago?”). For both
tasks, we use the same evaluation as for the original LAMA dataset. Results shown in Table 4 (right)
illustrate that Toolformer outperforms all baselines for both TEMPLAMA and DATESET. However,
7

…

the GPT-2 family (Radford et al., 2019), with 124M, 355M, 775M and 1.6B parameters, respectively.
We do so using only a subset of three tools: the question answering system, the calculator, and the
Wikipedia search engine. Apart from this, we follow the experimental setup described in Section 4.1.
Figure 4 shows that the ability to leverage the provided tools only emerges at around 775M parameters:
smaller models achieve similar performance both with and without tools. An exception to this is the
Wikipedia search engine used mostly for QA benchmarks; we hypothesize that this is because the
API is comparably easy to use. While models become better at solving tasks without API calls as they

…

In Appendix G, we extend these investigations in scale to the LLaMA v1 7B model (Touvron et al.,
2023) to see how tool-use scales with model capability instead of size. We find that the utility of
weaker tools such as the WikiSearch tool vanish for these stronger base-models, and we demonstrate

…

way these models learn to use tools can roughly be divided into two approaches: Either they rely
on large amounts of human supervision (Komeili et al., 2022; Nakano et al., 2021; Thoppilan et al.,
2022) or they work by prompting the language model in a few-shot setup tailored towards a specific
task where it is known a priori which tools needs to be used (Gao et al., 2022; Lazaridou et al., 2022;
Yao et al., 2022). In contrast, the self-supervised nature of Toolformer enables it to learn how and
when to use tools without requiring a specific prompt that shows task-specific examples of how a tool
could be used. Perhaps most closely related to our work is TALM (Parisi et al., 2022), an approach
that uses a similar self-supervised objective for teaching a model to use a calculator and a search
engine, but explores this only in settings where a model is finetuned for downstream tasks.

…

sequence generation (He et al., 2020), few-shot text classification (Schick and Schütze, 2021a) and
retrieval (Izacard and Grave, 2021) to reasoning (Zelikman et al., 2022). In a similar spirit, Toolformer
is trained on its own predictions after applying a perplexity-based filtering step.
6
Limitations
While our approach enables LMs to learn how to use a variety of tools in a self-supervised way, there
are some clear limitations to what can be achieved with our method in its current form. One such
limitation is the inability of Toolformer to use tools in a chain (i.e., using the output of one tool as an

…

we found models trained with Toolformer to often be sensitive to the exact wording of their input
when deciding whether or not to call an API; this is perhaps unsurprising given that LMs are known to
be very sensitive to the prompt they are provided with in both zero- and few-shot settings (Jiang et al.,

…

7
Conclusion
We have introduced Toolformer, a LM that learns in a self-supervised way how to use different tools
such as search engines, calculators, and translation systems via simple API calls. This is done by
finetuning on sampled API calls that are filtered based on whether they reduce perplexity on future

February 22, 2024
Language models (LMs) exhibit remarkable abilities to solve new tasks from just a few examples or textual instructions, especially at scale.
They also, paradoxically, struggle with basic functionality, such as arithmetic or factual lookup, where much simpler and smaller specialized models excel.
In this paper, we show that LMs can teach themselves to use external tools via simple APIs and achieve the best of both worlds.
We introduce Toolformer, a model trained to decide which APIs to call, when to call them, what arguments to pass, and how to best incorporate the results into future token prediction.
This is done in a self-supervised way, requiring nothing more than a handful of demonstrations for each API.
We incorporate a range of tools, including a calculator, a Q&A system, a search engine, a translation system, and a calendar.
Toolformer achieves substantially improved zero-shot performance across a variety of downstream tasks, often competitive with much larger models, without sacrificing its core language modeling abilities.
…
Speculative decoding is a standard method for accelerating the inference speed of large language models.
However, scaling it for production environments poses several engineering challenges, including efficiently implementing different operations (e.g., tree attention and multi-round speculative decoding) on GPU.
In this paper, we detail the training and inference optimization techniques that we have implemented to enable EAGLE-based speculative decoding at a production scale for Llama models.
With these changes, we achieve a new state-of-the-art inference latency for Llama models.
For example, Llama4 Maverick decodes at a speed of about 4 ms per token (with a batch size of one) on 8 NVIDIA H100 GPUs, which is 10% faster than the previously best known method.
Furthermore, for EAGLE-based speculative decoding, our optimizations enable us to achieve a speed-up for large batch sizes between 1.4x and 2.0x at production scale.
…
We introduce ASTRO, the "Autoregressive Search-Taught Reasoner", a framework for training language models to reason like search algorithms, explicitly leveraging self-reflection, backtracking, and exploration in their outputs.
Recently, training large language models (LLMs) via reinforcement learning (RL) has led to the advent of reasoning models with greatly enhanced reasoning capabilities.
Open-source replications of reasoning models, while successful, build upon models that already exhibit strong reasoning capabilities along with search behavior observed even before RL.
As a result, it is yet unclear how to boost the reasoning capabilities of other non-reasoner models including Llama 3.
ASTRO teaches such models to internalize structured search behavior through a synthetic dataset derived from Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) over mathematical problem-solving trajectories.
By converting search traces into natural language chain-of-thoughts that capture both successes and recoveries from failure, ASTRO bootstraps models with a rich prior for exploration during RL.
We finetune our models on these search-derived traces and further improve performance via RL with verifiable rewards.
We apply ASTRO to the Llama 3 family of models and achieve absolute performance gains of 16.0% on MATH-500, 26.9% on AMC 2023, and 20.0% on AIME 2024, especially improving upon challenging problems that require iterative correction.
Our results demonstrate that search-inspired training offers a principled way to instill robust reasoning capabilities into open LLMs.
Joongwon (Daniel) Kim, Anirudh Goyal, Liang Tan, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Srini Iyer, Tianlu Wang
July 02, 2025
…
We then train neural encoding and decoding models using representations, derived either from linguistic theory or from large language models, to map the location, dynamics and development of the language hierarchy in the brain.
We find that a broad range of linguistic features is robustly represented across the cortex, even in 2–5-year-olds.
Crucially, these representations evolve with age: while fast phonetic features are already present in the superior temporal gyrus of the youngest individuals, slower word-level representations only emerge in the associative cortices of older individuals.
Remarkably, this neuro-developmental trajectory is spontaneously captured by large language models: with training, these AI models learned representations that can only be identified in the adult human brain.
Together, these findings reveal the maturation of language representations in the developing brain and show that modern AI systems provide a promising tool to model the neural bases of language acquisition.
…
We present ReasonIR-8B, the first retriever specifically trained for general reasoning tasks.
Existing retrievers have shown limited gains on reasoning tasks, in part because existing training datasets focus on short factual queries tied to documents that straightforwardly answer them.
We develop a synthetic data generation pipeline that, for each document, produces a challenging and relevant query that requires reasoning to match, as well as a plausibly related but ultimately unhelpful hard negative.
By training on a mixture of this synthetic data and existing public data, ReasonIR-8B achieves a new state-of-the-art of 29.9 nDCG@10 without reranker and 36.9 nDCG@10 with reranker on BRIGHT, a widely-used reasoning-intensive information retrieval (IR) benchmark.
…
Our training recipe is general and can be easily extended to future LLMs; to this end, we open-source our code, data, and model.
Rulin Shao, Qiao Rui, Varsha Kishore, Niklas Muennighoff, Victoria Lin, Daniela Rus, Bryan Kian Hsiang Low, Sewon Min, Scott Yih, Pang Wei Koh, Luke Zettlemoyer

Abstract
Language models (LMs) exhibit remarkable abilities to solve new tasks from just a
few examples or textual instructions, especially at scale.
They also, paradoxically,
struggle with basic functionality, such as arithmetic or factual lookup, where much
simpler and smaller specialized models excel.
In this paper, we show that LMs
…
1
Introduction
Large language models achieve impressive zero and few-shot results on a variety of natural language
processing tasks (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022, i.a.).
However, these models have
several inherent limitations that can at best be partially addressed by further scaling.
These limitations
…
(Patel et al., 2021) and an unawareness of the progression of time (Dhingra et al., 2022).
A simple way to overcome the limitations of today’s language models is to give them the ability to
use external tools such as search engines, calculators, or calendars.
However, existing approaches
either rely on large amounts of human annotations (Komeili et al., 2022; Thoppilan et al., 2022) or
limit tool use to task-specific settings only (e.g., Gao et al., 2022; Parisi et al., 2022), hindering a
more widespread adoption of tool use in LMs.
Therefore, we propose Toolformer, a model that learns
…
• The LM should not lose any of its generality and should be able to decide for itself when
and how to use which tool.
In contrast to existing approaches, this enables a much more
comprehensive use of tools that is not tied to specific tasks.
Our approach for achieving these goals is based on the recent idea of using large LMs with in-context
learning (Brown et al., 2020) to generate entire datasets from scratch (Schick and Schütze, 2021b;
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).
…
i , c2
i , . . . , ck
i . We then execute
these API calls and filter out all calls which do not reduce the loss Li over the next tokens.
All
remaining API calls are interleaved with the original text, resulting in a new text x∗.
Honovich et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022): Given just a handful of human-written examples of how an
API can be used, we let a LM annotate a huge language modeling dataset with potential API calls.
We then use a self-supervised loss to determine which of these API calls actually help the model in
predicting future tokens.
Finally, we finetune the LM itself on the API calls that it considers useful.
As illustrated in Figure 1, through this simple approach, LMs can learn to control a variety of tools,
and to choose for themselves which tool to use when and how.
As our approach is agnostic of the dataset being used, we can apply it to the exact same dataset
that was used to pretrain a model in the first place.
This ensures that the model does not lose any
of its generality and language modeling abilities.
We conduct experiments on a variety of different
downstream tasks, demonstrating that after learning to use tools, Toolformer, which is based on
a pretrained GPT-J model (Wang and Komatsuzaki, 2021) with 6.7B parameters, achieves much
stronger zero-shot results, clearly outperforming a much larger GPT-3 model (Brown et al., 2020)
and several other baselines on various tasks.
2
Approach
Our aim is to equip a language model M with the ability to use different tools through API calls.
We
represent API calls as tuples c = (ac, ic) where ac is the name of the API and ic is the corresponding
…
model’s core LM abilities; we verify this by looking at perplexity on two language modeling datasets
(Section 4.3).
Finally, we investigate how tool use is affected by model size (Section 4.4).
4.1
Experimental Setup
We use a subset of CCNet (Wenzek et al., 2020) as our dataset C and GPT-J (Wang and Komatsuzaki,
…
those cases where a user does not specify in advance which tools should be used in which way.
3While this filtering alters the distribution of training examples, we assume that the remaining examples
are close enough to the original distribution so that M’s language modeling abilities remain unaffected.
This
assumption is empirically validated in Section 4.3.
5
…
way these models learn to use tools can roughly be divided into two approaches: Either they rely
on large amounts of human supervision (Komeili et al., 2022; Nakano et al., 2021; Thoppilan et al.,
2022) or they work by prompting the language model in a few-shot setup tailored towards a specific
…
Bootstrapping
The idea of using self-training and bootstrapping techniques to improve models has
been investigated in various contexts, ranging from word sense disambiguation (Yarowsky, 1995),
relation extraction (Brin, 1999; Agichtein and Gravano, 2000), parsing (McClosky et al., 2006),