# Source: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/patil25a.html
# Author: Stephane Ross,&nbsp;Geoffrey Gordon,&nbsp;Drew Bagnell
# Author Slug: stephane-ross-nbsp-geoffrey-gordon-nbsp-drew-bagnell
# Title: The Berkeley Function Calling Leaderboard (BFCL): From Tool Use ...
# Fetched via: browser
# Date: 2026-04-10

[edit]

The Berkeley Function Calling Leaderboard (BFCL): From Tool Use to Agentic Evaluation of Large Language Models
Shishir G Patil, Huanzhi Mao, Fanjia Yan, Charlie Cheng-Jie Ji, Vishnu Suresh, Ion Stoica, Joseph E. Gonzalez Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR 267:48371-48392, 2025.
Abstract
Function calling, also called tool use, refers to an LLM’s ability to invoke external functions, APIs, or user-defined tools in response to user queries—an essential capability for agentic LLM applications. Despite its prominence, there did not exist a standard benchmark to evaluate function calling abilities, due to two reasons – the challenging nature of evaluating when a function call is valid, and the challenge of acquiring diverse, real-world functions. We present the Berkeley Function Calling Leaderboard (BFCL), a comprehensive benchmark designed to evaluate function calling capabilities in a wide range of real-world settings. The BFCL benchmark evaluates serial and parallel function calls, across various programming languages using a novel Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) evaluation method that can easily scale to thousands of functions. We construct the benchmark using a combination of expert curated, and user-contributed functions and associated prompts. Finally, BFCL benchmark evaluates the ability of models to abstain and reason in stateful multi-step agentic setting. Evaluating a wide range of models, we observe that while state-of-the-art LLMs excel at singleturn calls, memory, dynamic decision-making, and long-horizon reasoning remain open challenges. Since its preview, BFCL has become the defacto standard for evaluating function-calls, and can be accessed at gorilla.cs.berkeley.edu/leaderboard.html.
Cite this Paper
BibTeX
@InProceedings{pmlr-v267-patil25a, title = {The Berkeley Function Calling Leaderboard ({BFCL}): From Tool Use to Agentic Evaluation of Large Language Models}, author = {Patil, Shishir G and Mao, Huanzhi and Yan, Fanjia and Ji, Charlie Cheng-Jie and Suresh, Vishnu and Stoica, Ion and Gonzalez, Joseph E.}, booktitle = {Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning}, pages = {48371--48392}, year = {2025}, editor = {Singh, Aarti and Fazel, Maryam and Hsu, Daniel and Lacoste-Julien, Simon and Berkenkamp, Felix and Maharaj, Tegan and Wagstaff, Kiri and Zhu, Jerry}, volume = {267}, series = {Proceedings of Machine Learning Research}, month = {13--19 Jul}, publisher = {PMLR}, pdf = {https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mlresearch/v267/main/assets/patil25a/patil25a.pdf}, url = {https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/patil25a.html}, abstract = {Function calling, also called tool use, refers to an LLM’s ability to invoke external functions, APIs, or user-defined tools in response to user queries—an essential capability for agentic LLM applications. Despite its prominence, there did not exist a standard benchmark to evaluate function calling abilities, due to two reasons – the challenging nature of evaluating when a function call is valid, and the challenge of acquiring diverse, real-world functions. We present the Berkeley Function Calling Leaderboard (BFCL), a comprehensive benchmark designed to evaluate function calling capabilities in a wide range of real-world settings. The BFCL benchmark evaluates serial and parallel function calls, across various programming languages using a novel Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) evaluation method that can easily scale to thousands of functions. We construct the benchmark using a combination of expert curated, and user-contributed functions and associated prompts. Finally, BFCL benchmark evaluates the ability of models to abstain and reason in stateful multi-step agentic setting. Evaluating a wide range of models, we observe that while state-of-the-art LLMs excel at singleturn calls, memory, dynamic decision-making, and long-horizon reasoning remain open challenges. Since its preview, BFCL has become the defacto standard for evaluating function-calls, and can be accessed at gorilla.cs.berkeley.edu/leaderboard.html.} }
Copy to Clipboard Download
Endnote
%0 Conference Paper %T The Berkeley Function Calling Leaderboard (BFCL): From Tool Use to Agentic Evaluation of Large Language Models %A Shishir G Patil %A Huanzhi Mao %A Fanjia Yan %A Charlie Cheng-Jie Ji %A Vishnu Suresh %A Ion Stoica %A Joseph E. Gonzalez %B Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning %C Proceedings of Machine Learning Research %D 2025 %E Aarti Singh %E Maryam Fazel %E Daniel Hsu %E Simon Lacoste-Julien %E Felix Berkenkamp %E Tegan Maharaj %E Kiri Wagstaff %E Jerry Zhu %F pmlr-v267-patil25a %I PMLR %P 48371--48392 %U https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/patil25a.html %V 267 %X Function calling, also called tool use, refers to an LLM’s ability to invoke external functions, APIs, or user-defined tools in response to user queries—an essential capability for agentic LLM applications. Despite its prominence, there did not exist a standard benchmark to evaluate function calling abilities, due to two reasons – the challenging nature of evaluating when a function call is valid, and the challenge of acquiring diverse, real-world functions. We present the Berkeley Function Calling Leaderboard (BFCL), a comprehensive benchmark designed to evaluate function calling capabilities in a wide range of real-world settings. The BFCL benchmark evaluates serial and parallel function calls, across various programming languages using a novel Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) evaluation method that can easily scale to thousands of functions. We construct the benchmark using a combination of expert curated, and user-contributed functions and associated prompts. Finally, BFCL benchmark evaluates the ability of models to abstain and reason in stateful multi-step agentic setting. Evaluating a wide range of models, we observe that while state-of-the-art LLMs excel at singleturn calls, memory, dynamic decision-making, and long-horizon reasoning remain open challenges. Since its preview, BFCL has become the defacto standard for evaluating function-calls, and can be accessed at gorilla.cs.berkeley.edu/leaderboard.html.
Copy to Clipboard Download
APA
Patil, S.G., Mao, H., Yan, F., Ji, C.C., Suresh, V., Stoica, I. & Gonzalez, J.E.. (2025). The Berkeley Function Calling Leaderboard (BFCL): From Tool Use to Agentic Evaluation of Large Language Models. Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning, in Proceedings of Machine Learning Research 267:48371-48392 Available from https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/patil25a.html.
Copy to Clipboard Download
Related Material
Download PDF
OpenReview
Software