# Source: https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.08144
# Author: Yonghui Wu et al.
# Title: Google's Neural Machine Translation System: Bridging the Gap between Human and Machine Translation (Wu et al., 2016)
# Fetched via: search
# Date: 2026-04-11

**arXiv:1609.08144** (cs)
[Submitted on 26 Sep 2016 (v1), last revised 8 Oct 2016 (this version, v2)]
# Title: Google's Neural Machine Translation System: Bridging the Gap between Human and Machine Translation
Authors:Yonghui Wu, Mike Schuster, Zhifeng Chen, Quoc V.
…
Abstract:Neural Machine Translation (NMT) is an end-to-end learning approach for automated translation, with the potential to overcome many of the weaknesses of conventional phrase-based translation systems.
Unfortunately, NMT systems are known to be computationally expensive both in training and in translation inference.
Also, most NMT systems have difficulty with rare words.
These issues have hindered NMT's use in practical deployments and services, where both accuracy and speed are essential.
In this work, we present GNMT, Google's Neural Machine Translation system, which attempts to address many of these issues.
Our model consists of a deep LSTM network with 8 encoder and 8 decoder layers using attention and residual connections.
To improve parallelism and therefore decrease training time, our attention mechanism connects the bottom layer of the decoder to the top layer of the encoder.
To accelerate the final translation speed, we employ low-precision arithmetic during inference computations.
To improve handling of rare words, we divide words into a limited set of common sub-word units ("wordpieces") for both input and output.
This method provides a good balance between the flexibility of "character"-delimited models and the efficiency of "word"-delimited models, naturally handles translation of rare words, and ultimately improves the overall accuracy of the system.
Our beam search technique employs a length-normalization procedure and uses a coverage penalty, which encourages generation of an output sentence that is most likely to cover all the words in the source sentence.
On the WMT'14 English-to-French and English-to-German benchmarks, GNMT achieves competitive results to state-of-the-art.
Using a human side-by-side evaluation on a set of isolated simple sentences, it reduces translation errors by an average of 60% compared to Google's phrase-based production system.
|Subjects:|Computation and Language (cs.CL); Artificial Intelligence (cs.AI); Machine Learning (cs.LG)|
|--|--|
|Cite as:|arXiv:1609.08144 [cs.CL]|
| |(or arXiv:1609.08144v2 [cs.CL] for this version)|
| |https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1609.08144 arXiv-issued DOI via DataCite|

# Google’s Neural Machine Translation System: Bridging the Gap between Human and Machine Translation

Yonghui Wu, Mike Schuster, Zhifeng Chen, Quoc V.

…

###### Abstract

Neural Machine Translation (NMT) is an end-to-end learning approach for
automated translation, with the potential to overcome many of the weaknesses
of conventional phrase-based translation systems.
Unfortunately, NMT systems are known to be computationally expensive both in
training and in translation inference –
sometimes prohibitively so in the case of very large data sets and large models.
Several authors have also charged that NMT systems lack robustness,
particularly when input sentences contain rare words.
These issues have hindered NMT’s use in practical deployments and services,
where both accuracy and speed are essential.
In this work, we present GNMT, Google’s Neural Machine Translation system,
which attempts to address many of these issues.
Our model consists of a deep LSTM network with 8 encoder and 8 decoder layers using residual connections as well as
attention connections from the decoder network to the encoder.
To improve parallelism and therefore decrease training time,
our attention mechanism connects the bottom layer of the decoder to the top
layer of the encoder.
To accelerate the final translation speed, we employ low-precision arithmetic
during inference computations.
To improve handling of rare words, we divide words into a limited set of
common sub-word units (“wordpieces”) for both input and output.
This method provides a good balance between the flexibility of
“character”-delimited models and the efficiency of “word”-delimited models,
naturally handles translation of rare words, and ultimately improves the
overall accuracy of the system.
Our beam search technique employs a length-normalization procedure and
uses a coverage penalty, which encourages generation of an output
sentence that is most likely to cover all the words in the source sentence.
To directly optimize the translation BLEU scores, we consider refining the
models by using reinforcement learning, but we found that the improvement in
the BLEU scores did not reflect in the human evaluation.
On the WMT’14 English-to-French and English-to-German benchmarks,
GNMT achieves competitive results to state-of-the-art.
Using a human side-by-side evaluation on a set of isolated simple sentences,
it reduces translation errors by an average of 60% compared to
Google’s phrase-based production system.

## 1 Introduction

Neural Machine Translation
(NMT) [41, 2] has recently been introduced as a promising approach with the potential of addressing many shortcomings of traditional machine translation systems. The strength of NMT lies in its ability to learn directly, in an end-to-end fashion, the mapping from input text to associated output text. Its architecture typically consists of two recurrent neural networks (RNNs), one to consume the input text sequence and one to generate translated output text. NMT is often accompanied by an attention mechanism [2] which helps it cope effectively with long input sequences.
An advantage of Neural Machine Translation is that it sidesteps many
brittle design choices in traditional phrase-based machine
translation [26]. In practice, however, NMT systems used to be worse in accuracy than phrase-based translation systems, especially when training on very large-scale datasets as used for the very best publicly available translation systems.
Three inherent weaknesses of Neural Machine Translation are responsible for this gap: its slower training and inference speed, ineffectiveness in dealing with rare words, and sometimes failure to translate all words in the source sentence. Firstly, it generally takes a considerable amount of time and computational resources to train an NMT system on a large-scale translation dataset, thus slowing the rate of experimental turnaround time and innovation.
For inference they are generally much slower than phrase-based systems due to the large number of parameters used. Secondly, NMT lacks robustness in translating rare words. Though this can be addressed in principle by training a “copy model” to mimic a traditional alignment model [31], or by using the attention mechanism to copy rare words [37], these approaches are both unreliable at scale, since the quality of the alignments varies across languages, and the latent alignments produced by the attention mechanism are unstable when the network is deep.

…

This work presents the design and implementation of GNMT, a production NMT
system at Google, that aims to
provide solutions to the above problems. In our implementation, the
recurrent networks are Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
RNNs [23, 17]. Our LSTM RNNs have 8 layers, with residual connections between layers to encourage gradient flow [21].
For parallelism, we connect the attention from the bottom layer of the decoder network to the top layer of the encoder network. To improve inference time, we employ low-precision arithmetic for inference, which is further accelerated by special hardware (Google’s Tensor Processing Unit, or TPU). To effectively deal with rare words, we use sub-word units (also known as “wordpieces”) [35] for inputs and outputs in our system.
Using wordpieces gives a good balance between the flexibility of single characters and the efficiency of full words for decoding, and also sidesteps the need for special treatment of unknown words. Our beam search technique includes a length normalization procedure to deal efficiently with the problem of comparing hypotheses of different lengths during decoding, and a coverage penalty to encourage the model to translate all of the provided input.
Our implementation is robust, and performs well on a range of datasets
across many pairs of languages without the need for language-specific
adjustments. Using the same implementation, we are able to achieve
results comparable to or better than previous state-of-the-art
systems on standard benchmarks, while delivering great improvements over
Google’s phrase-based production translation system.
Specifically, on WMT’14 English-to-French, our single model
scores 38.95 BLEU, an improvement of 7.5 BLEU from a single model
without an external alignment model reported in [31] and an improvement of 1.2 BLEU from a single model without an external alignment model reported in [45].
Our single model is also comparable to a single model in [45], while not making use of any alignment model as being used in [45]. Likewise on WMT’14 English-to-German, our single model scores 24.17 BLEU, which is 3.4 BLEU better than a previous competitive baseline [6].
On production data, our implementation is even more effective. Human evaluations show that GNMT has reduced translation errors by 60% compared to our previous phrase-based system on many pairs of languages: English \leftrightarrow French, English \leftrightarrow Spanish, and English \leftrightarrow Chinese. Additional experiments suggest the quality of the resulting translation system gets closer to that of average human translators.

…

Even prior to the advent of direct Neural Machine Translation,
neural networks have been used as a component within SMT systems with some success.
Perhaps one of the most notable attempts involved the use of a joint language
model to learn phrase representations [13] which yielded an impressive improvement when combined with phrase-based translation. This approach, however, still makes use of phrase-based translation systems at its core, and therefore inherits their shortcomings. Other proposed approaches for learning phrase representations [7] or learning end-to-end translation with neural networks [24] offered encouraging hints, but ultimately delivered worse overall accuracy compared to standard phrase-based systems.
The concept of end-to-end learning for machine translation has been
attempted in the past (e.g., [8]) with limited success. Following seminal papers in the area [41, 2], NMT translation quality has crept closer to the level of phrase-based translation systems for common research benchmarks. Perhaps the first successful attempt at surpassing phrase-based translation was described in [31]. On WMT’14 English-to-French, this system achieved a 0.5 BLEU improvement compared to a state-of-the-art phrase-based system.
Since then, many novel techniques have been proposed to further
improve NMT: using an attention mechanism to deal with rare
words [37], a mechanism to model translation coverage [42], multi-task and semi-supervised training to incorporate more data [14, 29], a character decoder [9], a character encoder [11], subword units [38] also to deal with rare word outputs, different kinds of attention mechanisms [30], and sentence-level loss minimization [39, 34].

…

## 3 Model Architecture

Our model (see Figure 1) follows the common sequence-to-sequence learning framework [41] with attention [2]. It has three components: an encoder network, a decoder network, and an attention network. The encoder transforms a source sentence into a list of vectors, one vector per input symbol. Given this list of vectors, the decoder produces one symbol at a time, until the special end-of-sentence symbol (EOS) is produced. The encoder and decoder are connected through an attention module which allows the decoder to focus on different regions of the source sentence during the course of decoding.

…

In our experiments we found that for NMT systems to achieve good accuracy,
both the encoder and decoder RNNs have to be deep enough to capture subtle
irregularities in the source and target languages. This observation is
similar to previous observations that deep LSTMs significantly outperform
shallow LSTMs [41]. In that work, each additional layer reduced perplexity by nearly 10%. Similar to [31], we use a deep stacked Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) [23] network for both the encoder RNN and the decoder RNN.

…

### 3.1 Residual Connections

As mentioned above, deep stacked LSTMs often give better accuracy over
shallower models.
However, simply stacking more layers of LSTM works only to a certain number of
layers, beyond which the network becomes too slow and difficult to
train, likely due to exploding and vanishing gradient problems
[33, 22]. In our experience with large-scale translation tasks, simple stacked LSTM layers work well up to 4 layers, barely with 6 layers, and very poorly beyond 8 layers.
Motivated by the idea of modeling differences between an intermediate layer’s
output and the targets, which has shown to work well for many projects in the
past [16, 21, 40], we introduce residual connections among the LSTM layers in a stack (see Figure 2). More concretely, let \mathrm{LSTM}_{i} and \mathrm{LSTM}_{i+1} be the i-th and (i+1)-th LSTM layers in a stack, whose parameters are \mathbf{W}^{i} and \mathbf{W}^{i+1} respectively.

…

### 3.2 Bi-directional Encoder for First Layer

For translation systems, the information required to translate certain words
on the output side can appear anywhere on the source side.
Often the source side information is approximately left-to-right, similar to
the target side, but depending on the language pair the information for
a particular output word can be distributed and even be split up in certain
regions of the input side.

…

In addition to data parallelism, model parallelism is used to improve
the speed of the gradient computation on each replica. The encoder and
decoder networks are partitioned along the depth dimension and are
placed on multiple GPUs, effectively running each layer on a different GPU.
Since all but the first encoder layer are uni-directional, layer i+1 can start its computation before layer i is fully finished, which improves training speed. The softmax layer is also partitioned, with each partition responsible for a subset of symbols in the output vocabulary. Figure 1 shows more details of how partitioning is done.

…

## 4 Segmentation Approaches

Neural Machine Translation models often operate with fixed word
vocabularies even though translation is fundamentally an open vocabulary problem
(names, numbers, dates etc.). There are two broad categories of
approaches to address the translation of out-of-vocabulary (OOV)
words. One approach is to simply copy rare words from source to target (as most rare words are names or numbers where the correct translation is just a copy), either based on the attention model [37], using an external alignment model [31], or even using a more complicated special purpose pointing network [18].

…

### 4.1 Wordpiece Model

Our most successful approach falls into the second category (sub-word units), and we
adopt the wordpiece model (WPM) implementation initially developed to
solve a Japanese/Korean segmentation problem for the Google speech
recognition system [35]. This approach is completely data-driven and guaranteed to generate a deterministic segmentation for any possible sequence of characters. It is similar to the method used in [38] to deal with rare words in Neural Machine Translation.
For processing arbitrary words, we first break words into wordpieces
given a trained wordpiece model. Special word boundary symbols are
added before training of the model such that the original word
sequence can be recovered from the wordpiece sequence without
ambiguity. At decoding time, the model first produces a wordpiece
sequence, which is then converted into the corresponding word
sequence.

…

Our greedy algorithm to this optimization problem is similar to [38] and is described in more detail in [35]. Compared to the original implementation used in [35], we use a special symbol only at the beginning of the words and not at both ends. We also cut the number of basic characters to a manageable number depending on the data (roughly 500 for Western languages, more for Asian languages) and map the rest to a special unknown character to avoid polluting the given wordpiece vocabulary with very rare characters.
We find that using a total vocabulary of between 8k and 32k wordpieces achieves both good accuracy (BLEU scores) and fast decoding speed across all pairs of language pairs we have tried.
As mentioned above, in translation it often makes sense to copy rare
entity names or numbers directly from the source to the target. To
facilitate this type of direct copying, we always use a shared
wordpiece model for both the source language and target
language. Using this approach, it is guaranteed that the same string
in source and target sentence will be segmented in exactly the same
way, making it easier for the system to learn to copy these tokens.

…

The main problem with this objective is that it does not reflect the
task reward function as measured by the BLEU score in translation. Further,
this objective does not explicitly encourage a ranking among incorrect output sequences – where outputs with higher BLEU scores should still obtain higher probabilities under the model – since incorrect outputs are never observed during training. In other words, using maximum-likelihood training only, the model will not learn to be robust to errors made during decoding since they are never observed, which is quite a mismatch between the training and testing procedure.

…

## 6 Quantizable Model and Quantized Inference

One of the main challenges in deploying our Neural Machine Translation
model to our interactive production translation service is that it is
computationally intensive at inference, making low latency translation
difficult, and high volume deployment computationally expensive.
Quantized inference using reduced precision arithmetic is
one technique that can significantly reduce the cost of inference for these
models, often providing efficiency improvements on the same computational devices.
For example, in [43], it is demonstrated that a convolutional neural network model can be sped up by a factor of 4-6 with minimal loss on classification accuracy on the ILSVRC-12 benchmark. In [27], it is demonstrated that neural network model weights can be quantized to only three states, -1, 0, and +1.

…

In this section, we present our approach to speed up inference with
quantized arithmetic. Our solution is tailored towards the hardware
options available at Google. To reduce quantization errors, additional
constraints are added to our model during training so that it is quantizable
with minimal impact on the output of the model. That is, once a
model is trained with these additional constraints, it can be subsequently
quantized without loss to translation quality. Our experimental results suggest
that those additional constraints do not hurt model convergence nor the quality
of a model once it has converged.

…

In Table 1 we compare the inference speed and quality when decoding the WMT’14 English-to-French development set (a concatenation of newstest2012 and newstest2013 test sets for a total of 6003 sentences) on CPU, GPU and Google’s Tensor Processing Unit (TPU) respectively.^1^^1^1https://cloudplatform.googleblog.com/2016/05/Google-supercharges-machine-learning-tasks-with-custom-chip.html The model used here for comparison is trained with quantization constraints on the ML objective only (i.e., without reinforcement learning based model refinement).
When the model is decoded on CPU and GPU, it is not quantized and all operations are done using full-precision floats. When it is decoded on TPU, certain operations, such as embedding lookup and attention module, remain on the CPU, and all other quantized operations are off-loaded to the TPU. In all cases, decoding is done on a single machine with two Intel Haswell CPUs, which consists in total of 88 CPU cores (hyperthreads). The machine is equipped with an NVIDIA GPU (Tesla k80) for the experiment with GPU or a single Google TPU for the experiment with TPU.

…

## 8 Experiments and Results

In this section, we present our experimental results on
two publicly available corpora used extensively as
benchmarks for Neural Machine Translation systems:
WMT’14 English-to-French (WMT En\rightarrowFr) and English-to-German (WMT En\rightarrowDe). On these two datasets, we benchmark GNMT models with word-based, character-based, and wordpiece-based vocabularies.
We also present the improved accuracy of our models after fine-tuning with RL and model ensembling. Our main objective with these datasets is to show the contributions of various components in our implementation, in particular the wordpiece model, RL model refinement, and model ensembling.
In addition to testing on publicly available corpora, we also test GNMT on
Google’s translation production corpora, which are two to three decimal orders of magnitudes bigger than the WMT corpora for a given language pair. We
compare the accuracy of our model against human accuracy and the
best Phrase-Based Machine Translation (PBMT) production system for Google Translate.
In all experiments, our models consist of 8 encoder layers and 8 decoder layers.
(Since the bottom encoder layer is actually bi-directional, in total there are
9 logically distinct LSTM passes in the encoder.)
The attention network is a simple feedforward network with one hidden layer with 1024 nodes.
All of the models use 1024 LSTM nodes per encoder and decoder layers.

### 8.1 Datasets

We evaluate our model on the WMT En\rightarrowFr dataset, the WMT En\rightarrowDe dataset, as well as many Google-internal production datasets. On WMT En\rightarrowFr, the training set contains 36M sentence pairs. On WMT En\rightarrowDe, the training set contains 5M sentence pairs. In both cases, we use newstest2014 as the test sets to compare against previous work [31, 37, 45]. The combination of newstest2012 and newstest2013 is used as the development set.
In addition to WMT, we also evaluate
our model on some Google-internal datasets representing a wider
spectrum of languages with distinct linguistic properties:
English \leftrightarrow French, English \leftrightarrow Spanish and English \leftrightarrow Chinese.

Bridging the Gap between Human and Machine
Translation
Y. Wu, M. Schuster, Z. Chen, Q.V. Le, M. Norouzi, et al.
Google
arXiv:1609.08144v2
Reviewed by : Bill Zhang
University of Virginia
https://qdata.github.io/deep2Read/
Outline
Introduction
Model Architecture
Segmentation
Training Criteria
Quantized Model
Decoder
Experiments & Results
Summary

Introduction
Basic Premise and Motivation
▶Standard NMTs have slow training and inference speeds, are
ineffective at dealing with rare words, and sometimes fail to
translate all source words; GNMT aims to improve upon all
these problems
▶GNMT is robust and works for a variety of language pairs and
reduces error by 60% based on human evaluations
Model Architecture
Overview
▶Seq-to-seq model with attention
▶Encoder, decoder, and attention networks
▶Define X = x1, ..., xM and Y = y1, ..., yN as the source and
target sentences
▶Encoder: x1, ..., xM = EncoderRNN(x1, ..., xM)
▶P(Y |X) = P(Y |x1, ..., xM)
= ΠN
i=1P(yi|y0, y1, ..., yi−1; x1, ..., xM)
▶Decoder: RNN with softmax; RNN outputs a hidden state yi
then generates a probability distribution using softmax
▶Deep networks perform better, so both encoder and decoder
have multiple layers

…

Model Architecture
Residual Connections
▶Stacking LSTM layers only improves performance initially; for
translation, at around 6-8 layers, it becomes too difficult and
slow to train
▶Add residual connections, which greatly improves gradient
flow in backward pass and allows for much deeper networks to
be trained
▶ci
t, mi
t = LSTMi(ci
t−1, mi
t−1, xi−1
t
; W i)
▶xi
t = mi
t(+xi−1
t
)
▶ci+1
t
, mi+1
t
= LSTMi+1(ci+1
t−1, mi+1
t−1, xi
t; W i+1)
Model Architecture
Bi-directional Encoder for First Layer
▶Context not necessarily left-to-right; could be in either
direction depending on language
▶Use a bi-directional encoder to take this into account; only in
first layer to maximize parallelism

…

unidirectional, (i + 1)th layer can start running before ith layer
is finished; softmax layer also partitioned
▶Cannot have all bi-directional layers since both directions
would have to be finished before next layers could start
▶Attention connected to bottom decoder layer, not top, because
otherwise, no parallelism possible in decoding step
Segmentation
Wordpiece Model
▶Used to solve Japanese/Korean segmentation problem;
deterministic results
▶Given a training corpus, select D wordpieces which maximize
language-model likelihood on training data; new wordpieces
are added in a greedy manner
▶Rare entity names and numbers are handled by shared
wordpiece model between source and target language
▶Wordpieces combine efficiency of words with flexibility of
characters
Segmentation
Mixed Word/Character Model
▶Similar to normal word model, except OOV words are not
collapsed into <unk> character, but rather into a sequence of
characters
▶Special prefixes added before characters to indicate position in
the word: <B> (Beginning), <M> (Middle), and <E> (End)
Training Criteria
Objective Function
▶Given N pairs of input-output pairs (X (i), Y ∗(i)),
OML(θ) = ΣN
i=1 log Pθ(Y ∗(i)|X (i))
▶Does not reward sentences close to but not exactly matching
target sentence
▶ORL(θ) = ΣN
i=1ΣY ∈yPθ(Y |X (i))r(Y , Y ∗(i))
▶r(Y , Y ∗(i)) is calculated using custom GLEU score instead of
standard BLEU, which is more appropriate for an entire corpus
▶GLEU is calculated by taking all subsequences of size 1, 2, 3,
or 4 tokens and taking minimum of recall (
matching n-grams
total n-grams in target)
and precision (
matching n-grams
total n-grams in generated)
▶First train model using standard likelihood objective until
convergence, then refine using mixed objective
▶Omixed(θ) = αOML(θ) + ORL(θ), α = 0.017
Quantized Model
Constraints
▶NMT too computationally intensive for inference
▶Constrain LSTM accumulators to [−δ, δ], δ ranges from 8.0 to
1.0 from beginning to end of training
▶c
′i
t , mi
t = LSTMi(ci
t−1, mi
t−1, xi−1
t
; W i)
▶ci
t = max(−δ, min(δ, c
′i
t ))
▶x
′i
t = mi
t + xi−1
t
▶xi
t = max(−δ, min(δ, x
′i
t ))
▶c
′i+1
t
, mi+1
t
= LSTMi+1(ci+1
t−1, mi+1
t−1, xi
t; W i+1)
▶Bound softmax layer output to [−γ, γ], γ empirically
determined to be 25.0
▶vt = Ws ∗yt
▶v ′
t = max(−γ, min(γ, vt))
▶pt = softmax(v ′
t)
Quantized Model
Quantized Inference
▶Replace all floating point operations in previous equations and
also within LSTM with fixed-point 8 to 16-bit integer
operations
▶All weight matrices converted to 8-bit integer matrices
▶All accumulator values become 16-bit integers
▶Sigmoid, tanh, and element-wise operations become 16-bit
integer operations
▶During training, still keep floating-point precision; only
clipping occurs during training

…

Decoder
Beam Search
▶Add length normalization and coverage penalty to traditional
beam search
▶Length normalization: shorter sentences tend to be favored by
regular beam search
▶lp(Y ) = (5+|Y |)α
(5+1)α
▶Coverage penalty: favor sentences which cover source sentence
according to attention module
▶cp(X; Y ) = β ∗Σ|X|
i=1 log(min(Σ|Y |
i=1pi,j, 1.0))
▶s(Y , X) = log(P(Y |X))/lp(Y ) + cp(X; Y )
▶Pruning
▶Instead of 8-12 hypotheses for beam search, only consider 2-4
▶Only consider tokens within beamsize of the best token score
▶Once normalized best score is found, prune all hypotheses
more than beamsize from score
Experiments & Results
Datasets and Setup
▶WMT’14 English-to-French
▶WMT’14 English-to-German
▶Google’s translation production corpora
▶Tested word-based, character-based, and wordpiece-based
models
▶Tested effects of objective refining and model ensembling
▶8 encoder layers, 8 decoder layers, attention is feed-forward
with 1024 nodes, each layer has 1024 LSTM nodes
▶Used BLEU as well as human evaluated side by side scores as
metrics
Experiments & Results
Training Procedure
▶Implemented with Tensorflow, 12 replicas running concurrently
on separate machines, parameters updated asynchronously
▶Initialize all trainable parameters within [−0.04, 0.04],
gradients clipped to 5.0 norm
▶Stage 1 (ML objective): Each step is mini-batch of 128
examples; start with Adam (α = 0.0002) for first 60k steps,
then switch to SGD (α = 0.5); start halving rate after 1.2M
steps
▶Stage 2 (RL objective): Simply run SGD until convergence
▶Dropout applied to prevent overfitting; only on ML phase, not
RL phase
Experiments & Results
ML and RL Objective Results
▶BLEU and decoding time compared for GNMT across
different models, then compared with other strong baselines
▶Further RL refinement results
Experiments & Results
Ensembling
▶Ensembling was performed with 8 models to produce final
BLEU scores; RL-refined ensemble had slightly better scores
than ML ensemble
▶Humans were asked to rate translation quality on scale of 0-6;
RL-refined ensemble had slightly worse scores than ML
ensemble
Experiments & Results
Google Production Results
▶No dropout because of large training set size, no
RL-refinement because of dubious significance
▶GNMT: Wordpiece models, no ensembling, shared vocabulary
of 32k
▶Evaluation data: 500 randomly sampled sentences and
translations from Wikipedia and news websites
Summary
▶GNMT approaches or surpasses all previously published results
▶Key results
▶Wordpiece model effectively handles large, open vocabularies
▶Parallelism can improve efficiency of training large-scale models
▶Model quantization drastically improves inference speed
▶GNMT approaches average human translator results and
improves upon previous phrase-based translators by around
60%
References
▶https://arxiv.org/pdf/1609.08144v2.pdf

# Google's Neural Machine Translation System: Bridging the Gap between Human and Machine Translation
@article{Wu2016GooglesNM, title={Google's Neural Machine Translation System: Bridging the Gap between Human and Machine Translation}, author={Yonghui Wu and Mike Schuster and Z. Chen and Quoc V.
Le and Mohammad Norouzi and Wolfgang Macherey and Maxim Krikun and Yuan Cao and Qin Gao and Klaus Macherey and Jeff Klingner and Apurva Shah and Melvin Johnson and Xiaobing Liu and Lukasz Kaiser and Stephan Gouws and Yoshikiyo Kato and Taku Kudo and Hideto Kazawa and Keith Stevens and George Kurian and Nishant Patil and Wei Wang and Cliff Young and Jason R.
Smith and Jason Riesa and Alex Rudnick and Oriol Vinyals and Gregory S. Corrado and Macduff Hughes and Jeffrey Dean}, journal={ArXiv}, year={2016}, volume={abs/1609.08144}, url={https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:3603249} }
GNMT, Google's Neural Machine Translation system, is presented, which attempts to address many of the weaknesses of conventional phrase-based translation systems and provides a good balance between the flexibility of "character"-delimited models and the efficiency of "word"-delicited models.
## Topics
...
This paper proposes and implements an effective technique to address the problem of end-to-end neural machine translation's inability to correctly translate very rare words, and is the first to surpass the best result achieved on a WMT’14 contest task.

# A Neural Network for Machine Translation, at Production Scale
September 27, 2016
Posted by Quoc V. Le & Mike Schuster, Research Scientists, Google Brain Team
...
-
Ten years ago, we announced the launch of Google Translate, together with the use of Phrase-Based Machine Translation as the key algorithm behind this service.
Since then, rapid advances in machine intelligence have improved our speech recognition and image recognition capabilities, but improving machine translation remains a challenging goal.
Today we announce the Google Neural Machine Translation system (GNMT), which utilizes state-of-the-art training techniques to achieve the largest improvements to date for machine translation quality.
Our full research results are described in a new technical report we are releasing today: “*Google’s Neural Machine Translation System: Bridging the Gap between Human and Machine Translation*” [1].
A few years ago we started using Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) to directly learn the mapping between an input sequence (e.g. a sentence in one language) to an output sequence (that same sentence in another language) [2].
Whereas Phrase-Based Machine Translation (PBMT) breaks an input sentence into words and phrases to be translated largely independently, Neural Machine Translation (NMT) considers the entire input sentence as a unit for translation.The advantage of this approach is that it requires fewer engineering design choices than previous Phrase-Based translation systems.
…
Since then, researchers have proposed many techniques to improve NMT, including work on handling rare words by mimicking an external alignment model [3], using attention to align input words and output words [4] and breaking words into smaller units to cope with rare words [5,6].
Despite these improvements, NMT wasn't fast or accurate enough to be used in a production system, such as Google Translate.
Our new paper [1] describes how we overcame the many challenges to make NMT work on very large data sets and built a system that is sufficiently fast and accurate enough to provide better translations for Google’s users and services.
| |
|--|
|Data from side-by-side evaluations, where human raters compare the quality of translations for a given source sentence.
Scores range from 0 to 6, with 0 meaning “completely nonsense translation”, and 6 meaning “perfect translation."|
The following visualization shows the progression of GNMT as it translates a Chinese sentence to English.
First, the network encodes the Chinese words as a list of vectors, where each vector represents the meaning of all words read so far (“Encoder”).
Once the entire sentence is read, the decoder begins, generating the English sentence one word at a time (“Decoder”).
To generate the translated word at each step, the decoder pays attention to a weighted distribution over the encoded Chinese vectors most relevant to generate the English word (“Attention”; the blue link transparency represents how much the decoder pays attention to an encoded word).
Using human-rated side-by-side comparison as a metric, the GNMT system produces translations that are vastly improved compared to the previous phrase-based production system.
GNMT reduces translation errors by more than 55%-85% on several major language pairs measured on sampled sentences from Wikipedia and news websites with the help of bilingual human raters.
| |
|--|
|An example of a translation produced by our system for an input sentence sampled from a news site.
Go here for more examples of translations for input sentences sampled randomly from news sites and books.|
In addition to releasing this research paper today, we are announcing the launch of GNMT in production on a notoriously difficult language pair: Chinese to English.
The Google Translate mobile and web apps are now using GNMT for 100% of machine translations from Chinese to English—about 18 million translations per day.
The production deployment of GNMT was made possible by use of our publicly available machine learning toolkit TensorFlow and our Tensor Processing Units (TPUs), which provide sufficient computational power to deploy these powerful GNMT models while meeting the stringent latency requirements of the Google Translate product.
Translating from Chinese to English is one of the more than 10,000 language pairs supported by Google Translate, and we will be working to roll out GNMT to many more of these over the coming months.
Machine translation is by no means solved.
GNMT can still make significant errors that a human translator would never make, like dropping words and mistranslating proper names or rare terms, and translating sentences in isolation rather than considering the context of the paragraph or page.
There is still a lot of work we can do to serve our users better.
However, GNMT represents a significant milestone.