# Source: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v37/ioffe15.html
# Author: Stephane Ross,&nbsp;Geoffrey Gordon,&nbsp;Drew Bagnell
# Author Slug: stephane-ross-nbsp-geoffrey-gordon-nbsp-drew-bagnell
# Title: Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep Network Training by Reducing Internal Covariate Shift
# Fetched via: browser
# Date: 2026-04-09

[edit]

Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep Network Training by Reducing Internal Covariate Shift
Sergey Ioffe, Christian Szegedy Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR 37:448-456, 2015.
Abstract
Training Deep Neural Networks is complicated by the fact that the distribution of each layer’s inputs changes during training, as the parameters of the previous layers change. This slows down the training by requiring lower learning rates and careful parameter initialization, and makes it notoriously hard to train models with saturating nonlinearities. We refer to this phenomenon as internal covariate shift, and address the problem by normalizing layer inputs. Our method draws its strength from making normalization a part of the model architecture and performing the normalization for each training mini-batch. Batch Normalization allows us to use much higher learning rates and be less careful about initialization, and in some cases eliminates the need for Dropout. Applied to a stateof-the-art image classification model, Batch Normalization achieves the same accuracy with 14 times fewer training steps, and beats the original model by a significant margin. Using an ensemble of batch-normalized networks, we improve upon the best published result on ImageNet classification: reaching 4.82% top-5 test error, exceeding the accuracy of human raters.
Cite this Paper
BibTeX
@InProceedings{pmlr-v37-ioffe15, title = {Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep Network Training by Reducing Internal Covariate Shift}, author = {Ioffe, Sergey and Szegedy, Christian}, booktitle = {Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning}, pages = {448--456}, year = {2015}, editor = {Bach, Francis and Blei, David}, volume = {37}, series = {Proceedings of Machine Learning Research}, address = {Lille, France}, month = {07--09 Jul}, publisher = {PMLR}, pdf = {http://proceedings.mlr.press/v37/ioffe15.pdf}, url = {https://proceedings.mlr.press/v37/ioffe15.html}, abstract = {Training Deep Neural Networks is complicated by the fact that the distribution of each layer’s inputs changes during training, as the parameters of the previous layers change. This slows down the training by requiring lower learning rates and careful parameter initialization, and makes it notoriously hard to train models with saturating nonlinearities. We refer to this phenomenon as internal covariate shift, and address the problem by normalizing layer inputs. Our method draws its strength from making normalization a part of the model architecture and performing the normalization for each training mini-batch. Batch Normalization allows us to use much higher learning rates and be less careful about initialization, and in some cases eliminates the need for Dropout. Applied to a stateof-the-art image classification model, Batch Normalization achieves the same accuracy with 14 times fewer training steps, and beats the original model by a significant margin. Using an ensemble of batch-normalized networks, we improve upon the best published result on ImageNet classification: reaching 4.82% top-5 test error, exceeding the accuracy of human raters.} }
Copy to Clipboard Download
Endnote
%0 Conference Paper %T Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep Network Training by Reducing Internal Covariate Shift %A Sergey Ioffe %A Christian Szegedy %B Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning %C Proceedings of Machine Learning Research %D 2015 %E Francis Bach %E David Blei %F pmlr-v37-ioffe15 %I PMLR %P 448--456 %U https://proceedings.mlr.press/v37/ioffe15.html %V 37 %X Training Deep Neural Networks is complicated by the fact that the distribution of each layer’s inputs changes during training, as the parameters of the previous layers change. This slows down the training by requiring lower learning rates and careful parameter initialization, and makes it notoriously hard to train models with saturating nonlinearities. We refer to this phenomenon as internal covariate shift, and address the problem by normalizing layer inputs. Our method draws its strength from making normalization a part of the model architecture and performing the normalization for each training mini-batch. Batch Normalization allows us to use much higher learning rates and be less careful about initialization, and in some cases eliminates the need for Dropout. Applied to a stateof-the-art image classification model, Batch Normalization achieves the same accuracy with 14 times fewer training steps, and beats the original model by a significant margin. Using an ensemble of batch-normalized networks, we improve upon the best published result on ImageNet classification: reaching 4.82% top-5 test error, exceeding the accuracy of human raters.
Copy to Clipboard Download
RIS
TY - CPAPER TI - Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep Network Training by Reducing Internal Covariate Shift AU - Sergey Ioffe AU - Christian Szegedy BT - Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning DA - 2015/06/01 ED - Francis Bach ED - David Blei ID - pmlr-v37-ioffe15 PB - PMLR DP - Proceedings of Machine Learning Research VL - 37 SP - 448 EP - 456 L1 - http://proceedings.mlr.press/v37/ioffe15.pdf UR - https://proceedings.mlr.press/v37/ioffe15.html AB - Training Deep Neural Networks is complicated by the fact that the distribution of each layer’s inputs changes during training, as the parameters of the previous layers change. This slows down the training by requiring lower learning rates and careful parameter initialization, and makes it notoriously hard to train models with saturating nonlinearities. We refer to this phenomenon as internal covariate shift, and address the problem by normalizing layer inputs. Our method draws its strength from making normalization a part of the model architecture and performing the normalization for each training mini-batch. Batch Normalization allows us to use much higher learning rates and be less careful about initialization, and in some cases eliminates the need for Dropout. Applied to a stateof-the-art image classification model, Batch Normalization achieves the same accuracy with 14 times fewer training steps, and beats the original model by a significant margin. Using an ensemble of batch-normalized networks, we improve upon the best published result on ImageNet classification: reaching 4.82% top-5 test error, exceeding the accuracy of human raters. ER -
Copy to Clipboard Download
APA
Ioffe, S. & Szegedy, C.. (2015). Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep Network Training by Reducing Internal Covariate Shift. Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, in Proceedings of Machine Learning Research 37:448-456 Available from https://proceedings.mlr.press/v37/ioffe15.html.
Copy to Clipboard Download
Related Material
Download PDF
Supplementary Material