# Source: https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.11171
# Author: Xuezhi Wang et al.
# Title: Self-Consistency Improves Chain of Thought Reasoning in Language Models
# Fetched via: search
# Date: 2026-04-09

# Title: Self-Consistency Improves Chain of Thought Reasoning in Language Models
Authors:Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Denny Zhou
…
Abstract:Chain-of-thought prompting combined with pre-trained large language models has achieved encouraging results on complex reasoning tasks.
In this paper, we propose a new decoding strategy, self-consistency, to replace the naive greedy decoding used in chain-of-thought prompting.
It first samples a diverse set of reasoning paths instead of only taking the greedy one, and then selects the most consistent answer by marginalizing out the sampled reasoning paths.
Self-consistency leverages the intuition that a complex reasoning problem typically admits multiple different ways of thinking leading to its unique correct answer.
Our extensive empirical evaluation shows that self-consistency boosts the performance of chain-of-thought prompting with a striking margin on a range of popular arithmetic and commonsense reasoning benchmarks, including GSM8K (+17.9%), SVAMP (+11.0%), AQuA (+12.2%), StrategyQA (+6.4%) and ARC-challenge (+3.9%).
|Comments:|Published at ICLR 2023.
V2: added PaLM results; V3: added UL2 results; V4: camera ready version at ICLR 2023|
|--|--|
|Subjects:|Computation and Language (cs.CL); Artificial Intelligence (cs.AI)|
|Cite as:|arXiv:2203.11171 [cs.CL]|
| |(or arXiv:2203.11171v4 [cs.CL] for this version)|
| |https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2203.11171 arXiv-issued DOI via DataCite|

Thought Reasoning in Language Models
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, 
Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Denny Zhou
Google Brain
xuezhiw@google.com
2
Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models (NeurIPS 2022).
J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, B. Ichter, F. Xia, E. Chi, Q. Le, & D. Zhou.
Recap: Chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting
…
$2 per egg.
How much does she make 
every day?
A:
Language 
model
This means she uses 3 + 4 = 7 eggs every day.
She sells the remainder for $2 per egg, so in 
total she sells 7 * $2 = $14 per day.
The answer is $14.
Greedy decode
●
The final answer is incorrect due to wrong reasoning paths
...
…
she has 16 - 3 = 13 left.
Then 
she bakes muffins, so she 
has 13 - 4 = 9 eggs left.
So 
she has 9 eggs * $2 = $18.
This means she uses 3 + 4 = 7 
eggs every day.
So in total 
she sells 7 * $2 = $14 per day.
The answer is $18.
The answer is $14.
The answer is $18.
Note the reasoning paths are optional, so they can be 
marginalized out
Prompt with chain of thought
…
she bakes muffins, so she 
has 13 - 4 = 9 eggs left.
So 
she has 9 eggs * $2 = $18.
This means she uses 3 + 4 = 7 
eggs every day.
So in total 
she sells 7 * $2 = $14 per day.
The answer is $18.
The answer is $14.
The answer is $18.
Majority vote 
on the answers
The answer is $18.
Prompt with chain of thought
Sample decode with diverse reasoning paths
Self-consistency is simple but effective
●
Simple compared to many other existing works
○
No fine-tuning, no human annotation, no additional modules like a verifier or a re-ranker
●
Striking performance gains across:
○
Four LLMs with varying scales: UL2-20B, LaMDA-137B, PaLM-540B, GPT-3 (175B)
●
SoTA performance across:
○
Various reasoning benchmarks: arithmetic, commonsense, and symbolic
Arithmetic 
reasoning
Commonsense 
reasoning
Self-consistency works with zero-shot CoT
Self-consistency works with “let’s think step by step” too!
Kojima et al.
Large Language Models are Zero-Shot 
Reasoners.
NeurIPS 2022.
GSM8K accuracy
Self-consistency achieves SoTA in Minerva and Flan-PaLM
Lewkowycz et al.
Solving Quantitative Reasoning 
Problems with Language Models.
2022.
Chung et al.
Scaling Instruction-Finetuned Language Models.
2022.
MMLU
Check out our paper!
●
ID 11718: Self-Consistency Improves Chain of Thought Reasoning in Language 
Models
●
https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.11171
●
Questions: xuezhiw@google.com

# Self-Consistency Improves Chain of Thought Reasoning in Language Models
@article{Wang2022SelfConsistencyIC, title={Self-Consistency Improves Chain of Thought Reasoning in Language Models}, author={Xuezhi Wang and Jason Wei and Dale Schuurmans and Quoc Le and Ed Huai-hsin Chi and Denny Zhou}, journal={ArXiv}, year={2022}, volume={abs/2203.11171}, url={https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:247595263} }
This paper proposes a new decoding strategy, self-consistency, to replace the naive greedy decoding used in chain-of-thought prompting that first samples a diverse set of reasoning paths instead of only taking the greedy one, and then selects the most consistent answer by marginalizing out the sampled reasoning paths.
## Topics
...
These findings reveal that, intriguingly, CoT reasoning paths can be elicited from pre-trained LLMs by simply altering the decoding process, and that the presence of a CoT in the decoding path correlates with a higher confidence in the model's decoded answer.
...
### Chain of Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Language Models
- 2022
Computer Science
Experiments on three large language models show that chain of thought prompting improves performance on a range of arithmetic, commonsense, and symbolic reasoning tasks.
### The Unreliability of Explanations in Few-Shot In-Context Learning
...
A framework for calibrating model predictions based on the reliability of explanations is presented, showing that explanations judged as good by humans—those that are logically consistent with the input and the prediction—usually indicate more accurate predictions.
### Large Language Models are Zero-Shot Reasoners
...
Experimental results demonstrate that the Zero-shot-CoT, using the same single prompt template, significantly outperforms zero-shot LLM performances on diverse benchmark reasoning tasks including arithmetics, symbolic reasoning, and other logical reasoning tasks, without any hand-crafted few-shot examples.
### Improving Coherence and Consistency in Neural Sequence Models with Dual-System, Neuro-Symbolic Reasoning

SELF-CONSISTENCY IMPROVES CHAIN OF THOUGHT
REASONING IN LANGUAGE MODELS
Xuezhi Wang†‡, Jason Wei†, Dale Schuurmans†, Quoc Le†, Ed H. Chi†,
Sharan Narang†, Aakanksha Chowdhery†, Denny Zhou†§
†Google Research, Brain Team
‡xuezhiw@google.com, §dennyzhou@google.com
ABSTRACT
Chain-of-thought prompting combined with pre-trained large language models has
achieved encouraging results on complex reasoning tasks. In this paper, we propose
a new decoding strategy, self-consistency, to replace the naive greedy decoding
used in chain-of-thought prompting. It first samples a diverse set of reasoning paths
instead of only taking the greedy one, and then selects the most consistent answer
by marginalizing out the sampled reasoning paths. Self-consistency leverages the
intuition that a complex reasoning problem typically admits multiple different ways
of thinking leading to its unique correct answer. Our extensive empirical evaluation
shows that self-consistency boosts the performance of chain-of-thought prompting
with a striking margin on a range of popular arithmetic and commonsense reasoning
benchmarks, including GSM8K (+17.9%), SVAMP (+11.0%), AQuA (+12.2%),
StrategyQA (+6.4%) and ARC-challenge (+3.9%).

…

improves model performance across a variety of multi-step reasoning tasks (Wei et al., 2022).
In this paper, we introduce a novel decoding strategy called self-consistency to replace the greedy
decoding strategy used in chain-of-thought prompting (Wei et al., 2022), that further improves
language models’ reasoning performance by a significant margin. Self-consistency leverages the
intuition that complex reasoning tasks typically admit multiple reasoning paths that reach a correct
answer (Stanovich & West, 2000). The more that deliberate thinking and analysis is required for a
problem (Evans, 2010), the greater the diversity of reasoning paths that can recover the answer.
Figure 1 illustrates the self-consistency method with an example. We first prompt the language model

…

to find the most consistent answer in the final answer set. Such an approach is analogous to the
human experience that if multiple different ways of thinking lead to the same answer, one has greater
confidence that the final answer is correct. Compared to other decoding methods, self-consistency
avoids the repetitiveness and local-optimality that plague greedy decoding, while mitigating the
stochasticity of a single sampled generation.
1

…

total she sells 7 * $2 = $14 per day. 
The answer is $14.
The answer is $14.
Greedy decode
Figure 1: The self-consistency method contains three steps: (1) prompt a language model using
chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting; (2) replace the “greedy decode” in CoT prompting by sampling
from the language model’s decoder to generate a diverse set of reasoning paths; and (3) marginalize
out the reasoning paths and aggregate by choosing the most consistent answer in the final answer set.
Self-consistency is far simpler than prior approaches that either train an additional verifier (Cobbe
et al., 2021) or train a re-ranker given additional human annotations to improve generation quality
(Thoppilan et al., 2022). Instead, self-consistency is entirely unsupervised, works off-the-shelf with
pre-trained language models, requires no additional human annotation, and avoids any additional
training, auxiliary models or fine-tuning. Self-consistency also differs from a typical ensemble
approach where multiple models are trained and the outputs from each model are aggregated, it acts
more like a “self-ensemble” that works on top of a single language model.
We evaluate self-consistency on a wide range of arithmetic and commonsense reasoning tasks over
four language models with varying scales: the public UL2-20B (Tay et al., 2022) and GPT-3-175B
(Brown et al., 2020), and two densely-activated decoder-only language models: LaMDA-137B
(Thoppilan et al., 2022) and PaLM-540B (Chowdhery et al., 2022). On all four language models,
self-consistency improves over chain-of-thought prompting by a striking margin across all tasks. In

…

and across commonsense reasoning tasks such as StrategyQA (Geva et al., 2021) (+6.4%) and ARC-
challenge (Clark et al., 2018) (+3.9%). In additional experiments, we show self-consistency can
robustly boost performance on NLP tasks where adding a chain-of-thought might hurt performance
compared to standard prompting (Ye & Durrett, 2022). We also show self-consistency significantly
outperforms sample-and-rank, beam search, ensemble-based approaches, and is robust to sampling
strategies and imperfect prompts.
2
SELF-CONSISTENCY OVER DIVERSE REASONING PATHS

…

answer. That is, we hypothesize that correct reasoning processes, even if they are diverse, tend to
have greater agreement in their final answer than incorrect processes.
We leverage this intuition by proposing the following self-consistency method. First, a language
model is prompted with a set of manually written chain-of-thought exemplars (Wei et al., 2022). Next,
2

…

question, self-consistency introduces an additional latent variable ri, which is a sequence of tokens
representing the reasoning path in the i-th output, then couples the generation of (ri, ai) where
ri →ai, i.e., generating a reasoning path ri is optional and only used to reach the final answer ai. As

…

approaches on a range of reasoning benchmarks. We find that self-consistency robustly improves
reasoning accuracy for every language model considered, spanning a wide range of model scales.
3.1
EXPERIMENT SETUP
Tasks and datasets.
We evaluate self-consistency on the following reasoning benchmarks.3
• Arithmetic reasoning. For these tasks, we used the Math Word Problem Repository (Koncel-

…

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
3.2
MAIN RESULTS
We report the results of self-consistency averaged over 10 runs, where we sampled 40 outputs
independently from the decoder in each run. The baseline we compare to is chain-of-thought
prompting with greedy decoding (Wei et al., 2022), referred to as CoT-prompting, which has been
previously used for decoding in large language models (Chowdhery et al., 2022).
Arithmetic Reasoning
The results are shown in Table 2.7 Self-consistency improves the arithmetic
reasoning performance over all four language models significantly over chain-of-thought prompting.
More surprisingly, the gains become more significant when the language model’s scale increases,

…

100.0 (+3.8) 87.8 (+7.6) 52.0 (+12.2) 86.8 (+11.0) 78.0 (+17.9)
Table 2: Arithmetic reasoning accuracy by self-consistency compared to chain-of-thought prompting
(Wei et al., 2022). The previous SoTA baselines are obtained from: a: Relevance and LCA operation

…

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Commonsense and Symbolic Reasoning
Table 3 shows the results on commonsense and symbolic
reasoning tasks. Similarly, self-consistency yields large gains across all four language models, and
obtained SoTA results on 5 out of 6 tasks. For symbolic reasoning, we test the out-of-distribution

…

in Figure 2. The results show that sampling a higher number (e.g., 40) of reasoning paths leads to a
consistently better performance, further emphasizing the importance of introducing diversity in the
reasoning paths. In Table 4, we show self-consistency yields a richer set of reasoning paths compared

…

Two sampled reasoning paths that are consistent with the ground truth are shown.
3.3
SELF-CONSISTENCY HELPS WHEN CHAIN-OF-THOUGHT HURTS PERFORMANCE
Ye & Durrett (2022) show that sometimes chain-of-thought prompting could hurt performance
compared to standard prompting in few-shot in-context learning. Here we perform a study using

…

adding chain-of-thought does hurt performance compared to standard prompting (Brown et al., 2020),
but self-consistency is able to robustly boost the performance and outperform standard prompting,
making it a reliable way to add rationales in few-shot in-context learning for common NLP tasks.
ANLI R1 / R2 / R3

…

beams and reasoning paths. On both tasks self-consistency outperforms beam search significantly.
Note self-consistency can also adopt beam search to decode each reasoning path (results are shown
as “Self-consistency using beam search”), but its performance is worse compared to self-consistency
with sampling. The reason is that beam search yields a lower diversity in the outputs (Li & Jurafsky,

…

parameters. (Right) Self-consistency improves performance across language model scales.
Self-Consistency Improves Robustness to Imperfect Prompts
For few-shot learning with man-
ually constructed prompts, human annotators sometimes make minor mistakes when creating the
prompts. We further study if self-consistency can help improve a language model’s robustness to
imperfect prompts.9 We show the results in Table 8: while imperfect prompts decrease accuracy with
greedy decoding (17.1 →14.9), self-consistency can fill in the gaps and robustly improve the results.
Additionally, we found that the consistency (in terms of % of decodes agreeing with the final

…

self-consistency confers some ability for the model to “know when it doesn’t know”.
LaMDA-137B
Prompt with correct chain-of-thought
17.1
Prompt with imperfect chain-of-thought
14.9
+ Self-consistency (40 paths)
23.4
Prompt with equations

### Transcript
{ts:0} hi folks welcome back I hope you're all doing well so when we want to have an
{ts:3} llm perform some kind of a reasoning task we know that the Chain of Thought prompting pattern works pretty well and
{ts:11} the paper we're looking at today is a neat little Improvement on that pattern just as a recap the basic idea of Chain
{ts:20} of Thought prompting is to ask an llm to generate a series of steps to solve a problem rather than asking it to solve a
{ts:32} problem outright you'll typically see this reflected with the phrase let's think step by step in the prompt and it
{ts:40} has been found that when you use that pattern you get much better performance on reasoning and arithmetic and problem
{ts:48} solving tasks the basic idea in this paper is pretty simple the authors are proposing that instead of looking at
{ts:55} just one Chain of Thought generation from the llm we generate multiple chains of thought and aggregate to get the
{ts:65} final answer essentially you want to choose the most consistent answer in the final set the intuition behind it is
{ts:73} similar to when humans solve a problem and multiple people come to the same answer but follow different paths to it
{ts:80} you have more confidence that the answer is correct the authors call this technique self-consistency you can see
{ts:88} an example of this technique in this diagram where we have a few short prompt setting up an arithmetic reasoning kind
{ts:98} of problem and we sample a number of answers from the llm two of which are correct but they arrive at that answer
{ts:107} via slightly different and chains of arithmetic and then one of them is wrong and from these we can derive that 18 is
{ts:118} indeed the correct answer the big advantage of this technique is that very much like Chain of Thought it's a very
{ts:126} simple approach it does not need you to fine tune or do any kind of additional training on the llm it's completely
{ts:133} unsupervised let's look at how they performed some of the benchmarking they look at a number of different llms gpt3
{ts:143} Lambda palm and the mechanism by which they get a diversity of answers is by setting the temperature parameter which
{ts:153} controls how deterministic the answers produced by the llmr it's a parameter that controls the randomness so to speak
{ts:163} of the generated answers if temperature is zero then you'll get the same answer for the same prompt every single time
{ts:170} but if temperature is greater than zero you might get different answers for the same prompt and they try it on a bunch
{ts:178} of well-known reasoning benchmarks things like math word problems or question and answers or symbolic
{ts:186} reasoning tasks and so on and what they find is that across the board on all these benchmarks they get a pretty
{ts:196} noticeable Improvement in accuracy compared to the simple greedy approach which is just doing Chain of Thought
{ts:204} with one generation especially on arithmetic you can see that the accuracy goes from about 95 percent to greater
{ts:214} than 99.3 percent this table shows some similar results for the different llms
{ts:221} and here in the brackets you can see the difference that the self-consistency method made plus 12 and a half percent
{ts:230} plus eighteen percent so across the board you can see that using this sampling approach from multiple
{ts:239} Generations is improving accuracy by a decent amount now you might ask well how many samples do I need the llm to
{ts:250} generate before I see some improvement in accuracy and that's what they are trying to show in these graphs here the
{ts:259} x-axis is the number of samples taken and the y-axis is the accuracy on various benchmarks and you can see that
{ts:268} after about 10 samples the gains in accuracy level off the other question to ask is how does the temperature setting
{ts:278} affect these results and it seems to be pretty robust across a range of temperature values these are curves for
{ts:287} different values of temperature and you can can see they all more or less show the same thing which is that accuracy
{ts:293} increases as you increase the number of samples but it does level off for larger numbers of samples of course the price
{ts:303} we pay for this is computational cost because we're generating many more samples out of the llm but it might be